===== PDF PAGE 1 =====
                                                         End-to-End Ontology Learning with
                                                              Large Language Models


                                                                Andy Lo                                 Albert Q. Jiang
                                                         University of Cambridge                     University of Cambridge
                                                           cyal4@cam.ac.uk                             qj213@cam.ac.uk




arXiv:2410.23584v1 [cs.LG] 31 Oct 2024
                                                            Wenda Li                                  Mateja Jamnik
                                                      University of Edinburgh                     University of Cambridge
                                                       wenda.li@ed.ac.uk                      mateja.jamnik@cl.cam.ac.uk



                                                                                      Abstract

                                                  Ontologies are useful for automatic machine processing of domain knowledge
                                                  as they represent it in a structured format. Yet, constructing ontologies requires
                                                  substantial manual effort. To automate part of this process, large language models
                                                  (LLMs) have been applied to solve various subtasks of ontology learning. However,
                                                  this partial ontology learning does not capture the interactions between subtasks.
                                                  We address this gap by introducing OLLM, a general and scalable method for
                                                  building the taxonomic backbone of an ontology from scratch. Rather than fo-
                                                  cusing on subtasks, like individual relations between entities, we model entire
                                                  subcomponents of the target ontology by finetuning an LLM with a custom regu-
                                                  lariser that reduces overfitting on high-frequency concepts. We introduce a novel
                                                  suite of metrics for evaluating the quality of the generated ontology by measuring
                                                  its semantic and structural similarity to the ground truth. In contrast to standard
                                                  syntax-based metrics, our metrics use deep learning techniques to define more
                                                  robust distance measures between graphs. Both our quantitative and qualitative
                                                  results on Wikipedia show that OLLM outperforms subtask composition methods,
                                                  producing more semantically accurate ontologies while maintaining structural
                                                  integrity. We further demonstrate that our model can be effectively adapted to new
                                                  domains, like arXiv, needing only a small number of training examples. Our source
                                                  code and datasets are available at https://github.com/andylolu2/ollm.


                                         1   Introduction

                                         An ontology is a formal and structural way of representing domain-specific concepts and their
                                         relations [16]. They can be simple (e.g., Wikipedia categories) consisting of concepts and only a
                                         small number of types of taxonomic relations (e.g., is-a relationships), or they can be complex (e.g.,
                                         Schema.org) consisting of axioms or many types of relations. For example, a simple ontology for
                                         programming languages might contain two concepts “Dynamically-typed language” and “Python”,
                                         and one relation “Dynamically-typed language → Python”, representing the knowledge that Python
                                         is a dynamically-typed language. A more complex ontology might contain axioms too, for example,
                                         “all programming languages are either dynamically or statically typed”. In this paper, we focus on
                                         ontologies with only concepts and taxonomic relations. Compared to typical deep learning models,
                                         which represent knowledge implicitly in its weights, ontologies capture knowledge in a structured
                                         and explicit manner, making them reliable, easy to edit and human-interpretable. Such benefits of
                                         ontologies have led to their wide adoption in practice. For example, Wikipedia categories have been


                                         38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).


===== PDF PAGE 2 =====
                             Dataset                                                             Target
                                                      Backpropagate



        Training
                                       ...    LLM             Mask-regularised loss




                                                                                        Output




  Evaluation /   Inference
                                                                        Sum and prune
                                       ...    LLM
                                                             ...                                          Document

                                                                                                          Concept
                                                                                                          Is-a relation

                                             Gold standard evaluation

Figure 1: OLLM: Using annotations of documents with their relevant concepts, we train an LLM
to model relevant subgraphs of the target ontology with a custom regulariser. During inference, the
generated subgraphs for each document are summed and pruned to give the final output ontology.
For evaluation, we measure the similarity between the generated ontology and the ground truth.


used for entity ranking [46] and information retrieval [42], or Schema.org [40] is a core component
of the Semantic Web [1] initiative.
While ontologies are useful, building ontologies often requires substantial manual effort. Ontology
learning (OL) is the study of automating the construction of high-quality ontologies at scale. For a
simple ontology, this amounts to discovering the concepts and taxonomic relations, usually based
on a source corpus. In this paper we aim to develop domain-independent methods for OL that are
scalable and produce better ontologies.
Traditionally, OL is viewed as a composition of subtasks [3], such as concept discovery and relation
extraction. In particular, prior works have demonstrated that state-of-the-art large language models
(LLMs) can solve such subtasks effectively [4]. While studying subtasks permits fine-grained analysis
and evaluation, it does not directly indicate the subsequent impact on the quality of the final ontology.
Moreover, there is potential room for improvement by combining several subtasks into one, such as
by modelling concepts and relations in conjunction. In this paper, we instead develop and evaluate
methods that construct ontologies in an end-to-end fashion to answer the following research questions:

1. How can we leverage LLMs’ knowledge base to build ontologies from scratch?
2. Does our method scale efficiently to practical problem sizes?
3. How well does our method generalise to new domains?

We introduce OLLM, an end-to-end method for using LLMs to construct ontologies at scale. Rather
than focusing on individual relations between concepts, we finetune an LLM to model entire sub-
components of the target ontology. The output ontology is generated by taking the sum of generated
sub-components and applying simple post-processing. An overview of the pipeline is shown in
Figure 1. To train OLLM, we collect the categorisation metadata for a subset of Wikipedia articles.
We attempt to adapt an LLM to model the relevant categorisation subgraph for a particular Wikipedia
article, but discover that direct finetuning leads to poor generalisation due to overfitting to high-level,
frequently occurring concepts. Instead, we propose a custom regulariser that reweights each concept
based on its frequency of occurrence, which substantially improves generalisation.
We evaluate OLLM by measuring the similarity of the generated ontology with the ground truth.
Current approaches for comparing ontologies rely on mapping components of the two ontologies
onto each other, most commonly by literal text matching [30, 45]. This is unreliable when the two
ontologies are not already sufficiently similar. Instead, we propose a suite of evaluation metrics
suitable for comparing arbitrary labelled graphs. These metrics compare edges and subgraphs of
the two ontologies using pretrained text embedders to test for semantic and structural similarity.
Both our quantitative and qualitative results reveal that an LLM can already outperform existing


                                                                   2


===== PDF PAGE 3 =====
extraction-based methods out of the box, and the performance is further improved by finetuning with
our custom regulariser. We additionally demonstrate that OLLM can be adapted to build the arXiv
ontology using only a small number of training examples, suggesting that our model can be applied
to new domains in a data-efficient way. In summary, our contributions are:

1. We constructed two datasets based on Wikipedia and arXiv, which can serve as standard datasets
   for future work studying end-to-end OL.
2. We created OLLM, a method that utilises LLMs to build ontologies from scratch. OLLM produces
   high-quality ontologies and serves as a strong baseline for end-to-end OL.
3. We developed new evaluation metrics for assessing the quality of the generated ontologies.


2   Background

An ontology is a structured way of representing concepts and relations of a shared conceptualisation,
that is, domain knowledge [15, 16]. Ontologies can span a wide range of complexities. A fully-
fledged ontology might contain concepts, relations, constraints, and axioms that enable complex
automated reasoning. In this paper, we focus on the core building blocks of an ontology: concepts and
taxonomic relations which represent is-a or is-subclass-of relationships between concepts. In some
cases, the is-part-of relation is also considered a taxonomic relation. We treat such an ontology as a
rooted labelled directed graph where nodes represent concepts, edges represent taxonomic relations
and the root node is the special concept of all concepts. A strict ontology asserts that the taxonomic
relation is asymmetric and thus the graph must be acyclic, though in practice some ontologies, such
as the Wikipedia ontology studied in this paper, may contain cycles. We therefore do not assume
that an ontology graph is necessarily acyclic. Examples of ontologies include WordNet [33] with
117,659 concepts and 89,089 taxonomic relations, and the Gene Ontology [2] with 42,255 concepts
and 66,810 taxonomic relations.
Ontology learning is the automatic extraction of ontological elements [17]. The most studied source
of input is unstructured text, though there are also works on semi-structured data like HTML [22]. In
this paper, the input is a set of documents, each consisting of some unstructured text. We additionally
assume each document is associated with one or more concepts in the ground truth ontology, which
we utilise for training. The goal is to reconstruct the ground truth ontology given the set of documents.
Prior works view OL as a composition of subtasks, and study each subtask in isolation [3, 6]. A
typical pipeline for building a simple ontology is to first perform concept discovery (identify the
nodes), and then relation extraction (identify the edges) [8, 24]. A notable approach for relation
extraction is Hearst patterns [18]. Hearst patterns are hand-crafted lexico-syntactic patterns that
exploit natural language structure to discover taxonomic relations. For example, the pattern “[noun
phrase] such as [noun phrase]” matches phrases like “dogs such as chihuahuas”, and thus can be
processed by regular expressions to identify the relation “dog → chihuahua”. Hearst patterns suffer
from low recall, as the relations must occur in exact configurations to be identified by the rules. Roller
et al. [39] suggest smoothing techniques to alleviate this issue though at the cost of lower precision.
Recently, language models have been used for OL. REBEL [7] treats relation discovery as a translation
task, and finetunes encoder-decoder LLMs to extract both taxonomic and non-taxonomic relations.
Babaei Giglou et al. [4] benchmarked a wide family of LLMs for concept and relation discovery,
and showed promising results. However, the quadratic complexity of link prediction makes this
approach unscalable to large ontologies. We provide more discussion in Appendix A.2.3. There are
also proof-of-concept works for building ontologies end-to-end with LLMs. Funk et al. [13] proposes
to build an ontology by recursively prompting LLMs, while Trajanoska et al. [44] generate the entire
ontology in one completion. However, both studies are limited in the scale of the task and evaluation:
they only considered ontologies of up to 1000 concepts and relied on manual qualitative evaluation.
We bridge this gap by proposing a method that can scale to practical problem sizes and new metrics
for systematic qualitative evaluation.
The evaluation of ontologies is an open research area. The main approaches are gold standard
evaluation [51], which matches elements of the generated ontology with a predefined target ontology;
task-based evaluation [36], which measures the usefulness of the ontology on a specific application;
and human evaluation [5, 37]. In this paper, we evaluate by the gold standard metric as it is the
most straightforward approach when ground-truth ontology exists. Prior works have considered


                                                    3


===== PDF PAGE 4 =====
              Main topic classifications
                                                         <s>[INST] Title: Hybridity
                                                         Hybridity, in its most basic sense ... [/INST]
                                                         Main topic classifications -> Human behavior
    Humanities                         Human behavior
                                                             -> Human activities -> Culture ->
                                                             Sociology of culture
          Politics                    Human activities
                                                         Main topic classifications -> Humanities ->
                                                             Politics -> Politics by issue -> Politics
                                                             and race
      Politics by issue              Culture
                                                         Main topic classifications -> Politics ->
                                                             Politics by issue -> Politics and race
                                                         Main topic classifications -> Culture ->
      Politics and race        Sociology of culture
                                                             Sociology of culture</s>


Figure 2: Example subgraph induced for the Wikipedia page “Hybridity” (left), where N = 4 and
C = {Politics and race, Sociology of culture}. The corresponding training text sequence (right),
where text coloured in grey is ignored as training targets, but is still present as context for later tokens.


matching concepts [30] and direct or indirect relations [23, 45] by literal text comparison. Others have
also considered edit-distance [12] or bag-of-words distributional similarity for text comparison [51].
These techniques for measuring semantic similarity may be considered unreliable and have been
superseded by current methods [9]. We instead rely on more modern techniques like pretrained text
embedders [10] and graph convolutions [26] to match substructures between the two ontologies.

3      OLLM
We now introduce OLLM, our novel, simple and scalable method for end-to-end OL with LLMs. On
a high level, OLLM uses an LLM to model concept subgraphs of the target ontology by utilising a
linearisation scheme to transform subgraphs into string sequences. In contrast to learning individual
edges, modelling subgraphs allows the model to learn higher-order structures, such as the interactions
between three or more nodes. To create the training dataset, OLLM relies on the annotations of
documents to concepts to generate document-subgraph pairings. Such subgraphs are much smaller
than the complete graph, so they can be learned by the model more easily. The generated subgraphs
for each document are summed into a weighted graph, and simple post-processing is applied to obtain
the final predicted ontology.

3.1      Subgraph modelling

Here, we describe the method for creating document-subgraph pairings. Given a document and its
associated set of concepts C, we define the relevant paths as the set of paths of at most length N from
the root to any of the concepts in C. The relevant subgraph is the set of nodes (concepts) and edges
(taxonomic relations) that occur at least once in the relevant paths. An example is shown in Figure 2
(left). The choice of N is task-specific and we describe our method for choosing N in Section 5.1.
To employ LLMs to model the subgraphs, we must linearise the graph into a string sequence. Existing
methods for autoregressive graph generation employ BFS [50] or DFS [14] ordering starting at an
arbitrary node. We instead choose to linearise the subgraph as a list of relevant paths that produced
the subgraph in the first place. We do so over BFS/DFS ordering for three reasons: 1) the subgraph is
defined from the relevant paths, which makes them the most natural representation; 2) we hypothesise
that the hierarchy of concepts in each path is a desirable inductive bias for the hierarchical nature
of an ontology; and 3) the path-based representation is much easier to describe in natural language
instructions so that our LLM prompting-based baselines may produce reasonable results without
finetuning. The linearisation template can be found in Figure 5 in Appendix A.1.2.

3.2      Post-processing

The final output graph is obtained by summing all generated subgraphs for each document and pruning
low-weighted components. Given the generated subgraphs G1 = (V1 , E1 ), . . . , Gn = (Vn , En ),
the raw output graph is defined as Graw = (Vraw , Eraw ), where Vraw = ∪ni=1 Vn and Eraw = ∪ni=1 En .


                                                             4


===== PDF PAGE 5 =====
Each edge (u, v) ∈ Eraw isPadditionally weighted by the number of times it occurs in the collection
of subgraphs: w(u, v) = i=1 1[(u, v) ∈ En ]. A few simple post-processing steps are then applied
                              n

to Graw in order to prune it:

1. Self-loop pruning: All edges (u, u) ∈ Eraw are removed.
2. Inverse-edge pruning: For (u, v) ∈ Eraw , if (v, u) ∈ Eraw and w(v, u) > w(u, v), remove (u, v).
   That is, bidirectional edges are turned into unidirectional ones.
3. Absolute thresholding: Edges in Eraw with weight below the α-th quantile are removed, where
   0 ≤ α ≤ 1 is a hyperparameter. This removes edges that are globally less important.
4. Relative thresholding: For each vertex u ∈ Vraw , let e1 , . . . , ek be the outgoing edges from u, sorted
                                                                                  Pi            Pk
   by weight in ascending order. Let the cumulative weight be C(ei ) = j=1 w(ej )/ j=1 w(ej ).
   The edges {ei | C(ei ) ≤ β} are pruned, where 0 ≤ β ≤ 1 is a hyperparameter. This is similar to
   top-p sampling [19], which we use to remove edges that are less important than their neighbours.
5. Clean up: After pruning all edges, nodes with no incoming or outgoing edges are removed.

We choose the hyperparameters α and β by tuning on the validation set (Section 5.1).

4         Evaluating end-to-end OL
Ontology evaluation is a hard problem as there are no quantitative definitions of what constitutes a
“good ontology”, and metrics generally only capture one aspect (e.g., structure but not semantics) of
an ontology. We approach evaluation by treating the ground truth as a proxy for a good ontology, and
comparing the generated ontologies against the ground truth. Here, we describe how the ground truth
is obtained, and introduce new evaluation metrics that are used for measuring ontology similarity.

4.1        Dataset

We collect the datasets for the two ontologies considered in this paper: Wikipedia categories and
the arXiv taxonomy. We use Wikipedia for learning and in-domain evaluation, and arXiv for out-of-
domain evaluation. To build the Wikipedia dataset, we perform a BFS traversal from its root category
“Main topic classifications” up to depth 3. For every category encountered, we retrieve the titles and
summaries (the text before the first section) of up to 5000 pages that belong in that category. The
source data is obtained from the Wikipedia API.1 The arXiv taxonomy is available from its home
page, and the source corpus is constructed from the title and abstract of all the papers uploaded to
arXiv in the years 2020–2022 with more than or equal to 10 citations.2 In total, the Wikipedia dataset
has 13886 concepts, 28375 taxonomic relations and 362067 documents, while the arXiv dataset has
161 concepts, 166 taxonomic relations and 126001 documents.
Generating the train and test splits from the            Train
datasets is a non-trivial problem. Each train-                                 Eval
                                                             3499
ing example consists of a document and its rele-                      227    2127
                                                                                    Train             Eval
vant subgraph (Section 3.1). The naive approach                       393
of randomly selecting a subset of document-                      1125    226             61          38
                                                                                                 1
subgraph pairs for the training likely leads to                                                2
                                                                                                 1
                                                                                                   2
data leakage as there might be a significant over-
                                                                    6289
lap between subgraphs in the training set and the                                                56
test set. Instead, we first split the full ontology
                                                                   Test                         Test
into train and test graphs, and then generate the
training document-subgraph pairs. This ensures               (a) Wikipedia                 (b) arXiv
that there are sufficiently many unseen concepts Figure 3: Intersection of concepts among the train,
(and thus relations) in the test split, as shown in validation and test splits of the datasets.
Figure 3. Our method is as follows:

1. Let V top be the set of top-level nodes, that is, children of the root node. Randomly partition V top
                top                 top              top
   into train Vtrain , validation Vval  , and test Vtest splits in 7:3:10 ratio.
      1
          https://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php
      2
          Citation counts obtained from https://api.semanticscholar.org/.


                                                     5


===== PDF PAGE 6 =====
2. Let d be the depth on the full graph, that is, the distance of the furthest node from the root. The
   nodes of the train graph are taken as the union of all the nodes that are within distance d − 1 from
                  top          top
   any node in Vtrain , plus Vtrain and the root. The edges are all the edges in the full graph that have
                                                              top        top
   both endpoints in the train graph. Similar applies for Vval    and Vtest  .


4.2   Metrics

Many existing methods for comparing ontologies rely on syntactic measures like string edit dis-
tance [12] as a proxy for semantic similarity, or require every concept to be tagged with descriptions or
documents for distributional semantics comparison [51]. To obtain more robust and general evaluation
results, we introduce a suite of similarity metrics that use modern methods like text embeddings [38].
Multiple metrics are used as they trade off between interpretability and comprehensiveness and we
aim to make them complementary by capturing different aspects of an ontology. For example, com-
paring ontologies by literal text equality is easy to understand but may be unreliable. In Section 5.4,
we provide further discussion on evaluation metrics in the context of our experiment results. We
denote the ground truth ontology graph as G = (V, E) and the generated graph as G′ = (V ′ , E ′ ).
Literal F1 While literal text matching is unreliable, it is also the simplest and the most interpretable.
We treat this metric as a reference metric for sanity check. The Literal F1 metric [23] is given by the
harmonic mean of the precision and recall of the edges:

                                          |E ∩ E ′ |                           |E ∩ E ′ |
                    Literal precision =                     Literal recall =
                                            |E ′ |                               |E|


Fuzzy F1 The Literal F1 metric puts a strong emphasis on using the correct wording, while in prac-
tice, we are interested in evaluating the semantics of an ontology. For example, using a synonymous
phrase for a concept should not be penalised. We utilise embeddings from a pretrained sentence trans-
former [38] and use the cosine similarity of the embeddings to measure semantic similarity. Specifi-
cally, let NodeSim(u, u′ ) ∈ V × V ′ → [−1, 1] be the cosine similarity between the sentence embed-
dings for u and u′ . The Fuzzy F1 score is obtained from the fuzzy precision and recall, defined as:

                     |{(u′ , v ′ ) ∈ E ′ | ∃(u, v) ∈ E. NodeSim(u, u′ ) > t ∧ NodeSim(v, v ′ ) > t}|
 Fuzzy precision =
                                                             |E ′ |
                     |{(u, v) ∈ E | ∃(u′ , v ′ ) ∈ E ′ . NodeSim(u, u′ ) > t ∧ NodeSim(v, v ′ ) > t}|
      Fuzzy recall =
                                                              |E|

where t is the matching threshold. We use all-MiniLM-L6-v2 [38, 47] as the embedding model, and
choose t as the median cosine similarity between the synonyms in WordNet [33], computed as 0.436.
Continuous F1 With fuzzy comparisons, the matches between the edges of the generated and the
ground truth graph are no longer one-to-one. This is problematic: consider two graphs A → B
and B ← A → B ′ , where B and B ′ match fuzzily. Such graphs will achieve a perfect Fuzzy F1
score yet they significantly differ. Additionally, we found that the previous metrics fail to provide a
useful signal for hyperparameter tuning, particularly for our baselines where the generated graphs
are poor. The Continuous F1 metric solves these issues by computing the highest-scoring edge
matching between the two graphs, where the similarity score between (u, v) and (u′ , v ′ ) is given
by min(NodeSim(u, u′ ), NodeSim(v, v ′ )). Obtaining such matching is equivalent to solving the
linear assignment problem [32], which can be computed by the Hungarian algorithm [27]. The
Continuous F1 score is obtained from the continuous precision and recall, given by:

                                               scont                                scont
                    Continuous precision =                  Continuous recall =
                                               |E ′ |                               |E|

where scont is the score achieved by the best edge matching.


                                                        6


===== PDF PAGE 7 =====
                                         (a) Direct finetuning




                                    (b) Finetuning with masked loss
Figure 4: Per token loss on a test set example of the final model trained with and without the
custom masked loss objective. A stronger red colour represents a higher cross-entropy loss. Within
the top-level concepts (children of the root) shown here, “Culture” and “Humanities” are in the
training set while others are not. Using the masked loss objective improves generalisation on the
high-level relations (e.g., “Main topic classifications” → “Academic disciplines”) while maintaining
performance on lower-level relations.


Graph F1 Instead of individual edges, this metric aims to capture the wider structure of the two
graphs. Intuitively, we want to know how concepts are related to their local neighbourhood. We do so
by using simple graph convolutions [49] with K = 2 to compute graph-aware node embeddings after
embedding each node with the pretrained embedder. Such embeddings in G are compared against
those in G′ by cosine similarity, and the highest-scoring node matching, similar to the Continuous F1
metric, gives the graph similarity score. The Graph F1 score is computed from the graph precision
and recall, defined as:
                                            sgraph                         sgraph
                        Graph precision =                 Graph recall =
                                             |V ′ |                         |V |

where sgraph is the score achieved by the best node matching.
Motif distance Taking inspiration from classical network analysis, we use network motifs [34, 41]
to evaluate the structural integrity of the generated graphs. Network motifs are reoccurring subgraphs
in a larger graph, most commonly 3-vertex subgraphs. They are typically indicative of the structural
characteristics of the full graph. We define the motif distance as the total variation distance between
the distribution of all 3-vertex subgraphs in G and G′ .


5   Experiments

We design our experiments to answer the following research questions:

1. Does OLLM produce better ontologies than traditional methods by subtask composition?

2. Can OLLM be easily adapted to a new domain?

We approach the questions by training OLLM on the Wikipedia dataset, and further transfer the model
to arXiv with a small number of arXiv samples. As baselines, we use two relation extraction methods,
Hearst patterns [18, 39] and REBEL [7]. Relation extraction depends on successful concept discovery
to produce high-quality ontologies. To estimate a ceiling to such baselines, we give the baselines
a substantial advantage by providing them with the ground truth concepts in the test graph. The
results show that even with such an advantage, OLLM outperforms the baselines on many metrics,
demonstrating the potential of OLLM for end-to-end OL (Section 5.3).


                                                      7


===== PDF PAGE 8 =====
5.1   Implementation details

Analysing the per-token loss on the test split sequences of a directly finetuned model (Section 3.1)
shows that the model tends to memorise high-level relations from the training set, leading to poor
generalisation, as shown in Figure 4 (top).
The crux of the problem is that low-level relations are substantially more diverse than high-level
ones: since we present both types of relations at the same rate to the model, it tends to overfit on
high-level relations while underfitting on low-level ones. To alleviate this issue, we introduce a
new training objective that randomly masks the loss contribution of frequently occurring relations.
Suppose a relation u → v is present n times in the training set. During training, when u → v appears
in one of the relevant paths, we mask the loss contribution of the tokens for v with probability
max(1 − M/n, 0), where M is a constant for the average number of times a relation is present in
the training set. Intuitively, this regulariser ensures that frequent relations are only seen ≈ M times
as targets throughout training, hence reducing overfitting as shown in Figure 4 (bottom). Note that
while v is masked from the target, its tokens are still present in the input sequence as context for
later tokens. A concrete training example can be found in Figure 2 (right).
We finetune Mistral 7B v0.2 [21] with Low-Rank Adaptation [20] on the masked loss objective. The
model is trained on the Wikipedia dataset for two epochs with Adam [25]. During inference, the
outputs are generated with temperature 0.1 and nucleus sampling [19] top-p of 0.9. We include a
finetuning baseline without the masked loss objective, denoted as Finetune. To adapt OLLM for
arXiv, we further finetune the model on 2048 document-subgraph pairs from arXiv. We initialise new
low-rank adaptors and train until the loss stops improving on the validation set. We name these models
OLLM (transfer) and Finetune (transfer) for training with and without the masked loss objective,
respectively. Full details for the Wikipedia and arXiv experiments can be found in Appendix A.1.2.
The hyperparameters for the post-processing steps are tuned by grid search on the validation set.
We sweep over α ∈ 1 − geomspace(1/|Eraw |, 1, 21) and β ∈ geomspace(0.1, 1, 21) − 0.1, and use
the values that maximise Continuous F1. For Wikipedia, we choose the subgraph modelling path
length N = 4 as it is the smallest N such that almost all edges (> 99%) occur in at least one relevant
subgraph. Such criterion is used since smaller N results in smaller subgraphs, which we expect to be
easier to model accurately. We choose N = 3 for arXiv for the same reason.

5.2   Baselines

We give a brief overview of the baseline methods here (in addition to Finetune and Finetune (transfer)).
The full implementation details can be found in Appendix A.1. All baselines produce weighted
directed graphs which we apply the same post-processing steps as in OLLM (Section 3.2) to obtain
the final predicted graph.
Memorisation Simply memorising the train graph is a surprisingly strong baseline due to the overlap
between train and test graphs, especially for Wikipedia. The weight of each edge is given by the
number of relevant subgraphs in which it appears.
Hearst We follow the improved implementation of Hearst patterns by Roller et al. [39]. The
authors propose spmi, a method which uses low-rank approximations to smooth the relation matrix
so that two concepts can be compared even if there are no direct matches between them. We use the
smoothed relation matrix to weigh the relations between the ground truth concepts. The additional
hyperparameter for the rank of the smoothed matrix is tuned by grid search over the validation set.
REBEL The REBEL-large model [7] is an LLM trained to extract many types of relations from
Wikipedia articles. We only take the “subclass of”, “instance of”, “member of” and “part of” relations
that were extracted. Similar to Hearst, we find that it fails to find many direct relations between
ground truth concepts. The same low-rank smoothing technique is applied to improve recall.
Prompting We test the Zero/One/Three-shot performance of instruction-tuned LLMs on the subgraph
modelling task described in Section 3.1. To obtain more comparable results, we use Mistral 7B
Instruct v0.2, the instruction-tuned version of the base model of OLLM, as the LLM for our prompting
baseline. The prompt template used is shown in Figure 6 in Appendix A.1.
Finetune To test the effectiveness of our masked-loss objective, we introduce a direct finetuning
baseline using the same configuration as OLLM except it is trained without loss masking.


                                                   8


===== PDF PAGE 9 =====
Table 1: Evaluation metrics of OLLM and baselines on Wikipedia and arXiv. OLLM performs
particularly well in modelling semantics, and remains competitive syntactically and structurally.
 Dataset     Method                Literal F1 ↑   Fuzzy F1 ↑   Cont. F1 ↑   Graph F1 ↑    Motif Dist. ↓
 Wikipedia Memorisation            0.134          0.837        0.314        0.419         0.063
           Hearst                  0.003          0.538        0.350        0.544         0.163
           Rebel                   0.004          0.624        0.356        0.072         0.132
           Zero-shot               0.007          0.871        0.455        0.639         0.341
           One-shot                0.031          0.888        0.477        0.610         0.314
           Three-shot              0.031          0.880        0.475        0.622         0.354
           Finetune                0.124          0.884        0.470        0.588         0.050
           OLLM                    0.093          0.915        0.500        0.644         0.080
 arXiv       Memorisation          0.000          0.207        0.257        0.525         0.037
             Hearst                0.000          0.000        0.151        0.553         0.098
             Rebel                 0.000          0.060        0.281        0.546         0.088
             Zero-shot             0.025          0.450        0.237        0.414         0.145
             One-shot              0.072          0.460        0.290        0.433         0.293
             Three-shot            0.051          0.405        0.212        0.385         0.124
             Finetune (transfer)   0.000          0.440        0.225        0.441         0.148
             OLLM (transfer)       0.040          0.570        0.357        0.633         0.097


5.3   Results

We first evaluate whether OLLM can accurately create ontologies with many concepts and relations,
such as the Wikipedia categories. Computationally, OLLM required 12 A100-hours for training
and 7 A100-hours for inference to generate an ontology for Wikipedia. This is a modest cost in
current standards, which demonstrates the scalability of OLLM for real-world problems. In terms
of performance, OLLM produces the most semantically accurate ontology in comparison to our
baselines as presented in Table 1. Across all of Fuzzy F1, Continuous F1 and Graph F1, we observe
the trend that OLLM scores the best, followed by Finetune and Prompting, and lastly Hearst and
REBEL. This is surprising, as it suggests that the combination of LLMs with our subgraph modelling
framework is a sufficiently strong inductive bias for LLMs to outperform traditional methods even
without finetuning. However, prompting alone is not sufficient to build high-quality ontologies. On
the Motif Distance metric, prompting methods score poorly at 0.314–0.354 in comparison to 0.050
and 0.080 for Finetune and OLLM respectively. This shows that using LLMs out-of-the-box for
subgraph modelling results in poor structural integrity, though this issue is solved by finetuning.
Qualitatively, we observe that OLLM can adhere to the clear, explicit naming style of Wikipedia, even
on unseen topics in the test set. For example, it generates “Mathematical categories” and “Groups
(mathematics)” under the parent concept “Mathematical structures” to distinguish from the natural
language sense of categories and groups (Figure 11c). Such style is not learned by the prompting
baselines: Three-shot generated “Elections → France”, while it most likely meant “Elections →
Elections in France” (Figure 18c). More sample outputs are shown in Appendix A.4.1.
The arXiv task differs from the Wikipedia task as it has much fewer relations, and there is even less
overlap between the train and test split. This imposes a great challenge on Finetune and OLLM
as they need to generalise with a limited diversity of training samples. Despite such constraints,
OLLM is substantially better than other methods in modelling the semantics of the test graph. On the
Fuzzy F1, Continuous F1, and Graph F1 metrics, OLLM performs the best among all methods with
0.570, 0.357, and 0.633, significantly higher than the next-best of 0.460, 0.290 and 0.546 respectively.
Inspecting the generated ontologies (Appendix A.4.2), we observe that prompting baselines tend to
produce repetitive concepts such as “Machine Learning and Artificial Intelligence” and “Artificial
Intelligence and Machine Learning” (Figure 27), while Hearst and REBEL put almost all concepts
under the same parent concept(s) (Figures 23 and 24). We also found that OLLM’s output for arXiv
contains concepts from Wikipedia, but restructured in a way that fits the arXiv ontology. For example,
“Life sciences” and “Biological evolution” appear in the Wikipedia training set under the same parent
category “Life” with no direct links between them. On the generated graph for arXiv, “Life sciences”
is instead promoted to one of the top-level concepts with “Biological Evolution” as one of its children,
which better fits the “fields of science” style of the arXiv ontology (Figure 20). This demonstrates
that OLLM can adapt to produce a new type of ontology by restructuring its learned concepts, all
using just a small number of training samples.


                                                      9


===== PDF PAGE 10 =====
In summary, OLLM scores the best or is competitive across all metrics in both tasks, with the notable
exception of the Literal F1 metric. We attribute this to the fact that Literal F1 is sensitive to factors
like casing and choice of words, and generally only measures syntactic similarity. For example, we
see that a suboptimal baseline like Memorisation scores the best on this metric with 0.134 on the
Wikipedia task. This reflects that syntactic similarity generally does not entail semantic similarity, so
syntax-based metrics should not be used as stand-alone measures for ontology quality.


5.4   Meta-evaluation

In this section, we analyse the usefulness of our new metrics for measuring graph similarity and
discuss the limitations of existing metrics. On the Wikipedia task, Memorisation, despite being
clearly the worst in Continuous F1 and Graph F1, performs the best on Literal F1 and the second-best
on Motif Distance. This can be attributed to the fact that Literal F1 is sensitive to semantically
insignificant syntactic differences such as casing and word form, and thus when the training and test
set has non-trivial overlap (Figure 3), it is biased towards methods that overfit. Similarly, as per the
method described in Section 4.1, the data splits are constructed with structural symmetry, hence we
expect the train and test splits to have a similar graph structure even though the represented concepts
are different. As a result, methods that tend to overfit, for example, Memorisation and Finetune,
achieve the best scores on Motif Distance. This demonstrates that Literal F1 and Motif Distance only
capture syntactic and structural similarity respectively, and thus should not be used as stand-alone
metrics for evaluation.
Analysing the edge and node matchings found by our Continuous F1 and Graph F1 metrics on
arXiv reveals that they successfully capture some human intuition on semantic similarity between
the two ontologies. In Figures 9 and 10, we visualise the ontology generated by OLLM and the
ground truth and observe that semantically similar components in the two graphs indeed get matched.
For example, the “Physics” and “Mathematics” clusters in the generated graph get matched with
the “Mathematics” cluster in the ground truth, “Data Analysis” and “Information” get matched
with “Statistics”, “Economics” with “Quantitative Finance”, and “Life Sciences” with “Quantitative
Biology”. This suggests that our edge/node matching procedure is capturing a “semantic graph
isomorphism” that allows one to compare similar components in the two graphs, even if they do not
exactly share the same concepts. We believe this example of a semantic mapping from one ontology
to another is strong evidence that our metrics are capturing meaningful qualities of the ontologies.



6     Discussion

Limitations We only study and evaluate the construction of simple ontologies with only concepts
and taxonomic relations. A potential approach to extend OLLM to produce non-taxonomic relations
is to add tags indicating the relation type to each edge when linearising the subgraphs for sequence
modelling. New evaluation metrics might also be required to handle multiple types of relations.
Another limitation is that the taxonomic relations in the generated ontologies are not necessarily
transitive due to the existence of cycles. This is a general problem for many OL methods and there
are existing works on cycle removal algorithms for cleaning hierarchies [43, 52]. We ablate this
in Appendix A.2.1 and found that the generated ontology can be made consistent by removing a
small number of edges. Furthermore, we were unable to fully control for data contamination as
the pretraining dataset of Mistral 7B is not publically known. We do, however, observe that the
generated ontologies are sufficiently different from the ground truth, indicating that OLLM is not
directly remembering samples from its pretraining stage.
Conclusion In this paper, we introduce a general method for building ontologies in an end-to-end
fashion. We propose a set of metrics for end-to-end OL that measures the semantic and structural
similarity between arbitrary labelled graphs. Our model, OLLM, outperforms traditional subtask
composition methods in reconstructing the Wikipedia categories, and can be transferred to build
ontologies for arXiv after finetuning on a small number of examples. Using LLMs as the backbone
for subgraph modelling opens up exciting avenues for future research. For example, one may generate
ontologies from corpora with images using vision language models [11].


                                                   10


===== PDF PAGE 11 =====
7   Acknowledgements
We thank Dr Thomas Sauerwald for suggesting network motifs as a basis for evaluation. AQJ
acknowledges the support of a Peterhouse Graduate Studentship.

References
 [1] Grigoris Antoniou and Frank Van Harmelen. A semantic web primer. MIT press, 2004.
 [2] Michael Ashburner, Catherine A Ball, Judith A Blake, David Botstein, Heather Butler, J Michael
     Cherry, Allan P Davis, Kara Dolinski, Selina S Dwight, Janan T Eppig, et al. Gene ontology:
     tool for the unification of biology. Nature genetics, 25(1):25–29, 2000.
 [3] Muhammad Nabeel Asim, Muhammad Wasim, Muhammad Usman Ghani Khan, Waqar Mah-
     mood, and Hafiza Mahnoor Abbasi. A survey of ontology learning techniques and applications.
     Database, 2018:bay101, 2018.
 [4] Hamed Babaei Giglou, Jennifer D’Souza, and Sören Auer. Llms4ol: Large language models for
     ontology learning. In International Semantic Web Conference, pages 408–427. Springer, 2023.
 [5] Janez Brank, Marko Grobelnik, and Dunja Mladenic. A survey of ontology evaluation tech-
     niques. In Proceedings of the conference on data mining and data warehouses (SiKDD 2005),
     pages 166–170. Citeseer, 2005.
 [6] Paul Buitelaar, Philipp Cimiano, and Bernardo Magnini. Ontology learning from text: methods,
     evaluation and applications, volume 123. IOS press, 2005.
 [7] Pere-Lluís Huguet Cabot and Roberto Navigli. Rebel: Relation extraction by end-to-end
     language generation. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP
     2021, pages 2370–2381, 2021.
 [8] Philipp Cimiano and Johanna Völker. Text2onto: A framework for ontology learning and
     data-driven change discovery. In International conference on application of natural language
     to information systems, pages 227–238. Springer, 2005.
 [9] Alexis Conneau, Douwe Kiela, Holger Schwenk, Loïc Barrault, and Antoine Bordes. Supervised
     learning of universal sentence representations from natural language inference data. arXiv
     preprint arXiv:1705.02364, 2017.
[10] Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. Bert: Pre-training of
     deep bidirectional transformers for language understanding. arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.04805,
     2018.
[11] Jeffrey Donahue, Lisa Anne Hendricks, Sergio Guadarrama, Marcus Rohrbach, Subhashini
     Venugopalan, Kate Saenko, and Trevor Darrell. Long-term recurrent convolutional networks for
     visual recognition and description. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision
     and pattern recognition, pages 2625–2634, 2015.
[12] Marc Ehrig, Peter Haase, Mark Hefke, and Nenad Stojanović. Similarity for ontologies - a
     comprehensive framework. In European Conference on Information Systems, 2005. URL
     https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:9982461.
[13] Maurice Funk, Simon Hosemann, Jean Christoph Jung, and Carsten Lutz. Towards ontology
     construction with language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.09898, 2023.
[14] Nikhil Goyal, Harsh Vardhan Jain, and Sayan Ranu. Graphgen: A scalable approach to
     domain-agnostic labeled graph generation. In Proceedings of The Web Conference 2020, pages
     1253–1263, 2020.
[15] Thomas R Gruber. A translation approach to portable ontology specifications. Knowledge
     acquisition, 5(2):199–220, 1993.
[16] Thomas R Gruber. Toward principles for the design of ontologies used for knowledge sharing?
     International journal of human-computer studies, 43(5-6):907–928, 1995.


                                               11


===== PDF PAGE 12 =====
[17] Maryam Hazman, Samhaa R El-Beltagy, and Ahmed Rafea. A survey of ontology learning
     approaches. International Journal of Computer Applications, 22(9):36–43, 2011.

[18] Marti A Hearst. Automated discovery of wordnet relations. WordNet: an electronic lexical
     database, 2, 1998.

[19] Ari Holtzman, Jan Buys, Li Du, Maxwell Forbes, and Yejin Choi. The curious case of neural
     text degeneration. arXiv preprint arXiv:1904.09751, 2019.

[20] Edward J Hu, Yelong Shen, Phillip Wallis, Zeyuan Allen-Zhu, Yuanzhi Li, Shean Wang,
     Lu Wang, and Weizhu Chen. Lora: Low-rank adaptation of large language models. arXiv
     preprint arXiv:2106.09685, 2021.

[21] Albert Q Jiang, Alexandre Sablayrolles, Arthur Mensch, Chris Bamford, Devendra Singh
     Chaplot, Diego de las Casas, Florian Bressand, Gianna Lengyel, Guillaume Lample, Lucile
     Saulnier, et al. Mistral 7b. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.06825, 2023.

[22] Lobna Karoui, Marie-Aude Aufaure, and Nacera Bennacer. Ontology discovery from web
     pages: Application to tourism. In In the Workshop of Knowledge Discovery and Ontologies.
     Citeseer, 2004.

[23] Vipul Kashyap, Cartic Ramakrishnan, Christopher Thomas, and A. Sheth. Taxaminer: an
     experimentation framework for automated taxonomy bootstrapping. Int. J. Web Grid Serv., 1:
     240–266, 2005. URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:5549251.

[24] Neha Kaushik and Niladri Chatterjee. Automatic relationship extraction from agricultural text
     for ontology construction. Information processing in agriculture, 5(1):60–73, 2018.

[25] Diederik P Kingma. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization.               arXiv preprint
     arXiv:1412.6980, 2014.

[26] Thomas N Kipf and Max Welling. Semi-supervised classification with graph convolutional
     networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1609.02907, 2016.

[27] Harold W Kuhn. The hungarian method for the assignment problem. Naval research logistics
     quarterly, 2(1-2):83–97, 1955.

[28] Woosuk Kwon, Zhuohan Li, Siyuan Zhuang, Ying Sheng, Lianmin Zheng, Cody Hao Yu, Joseph
     Gonzalez, Hao Zhang, and Ion Stoica. Efficient memory management for large language model
     serving with pagedattention. In Proceedings of the 29th Symposium on Operating Systems
     Principles, pages 611–626, 2023.

[29] Mike Lewis, Yinhan Liu, Naman Goyal, Marjan Ghazvininejad, Abdelrahman Mohamed,
     Omer Levy, Ves Stoyanov, and Luke Zettlemoyer. Bart: Denoising sequence-to-sequence
     pre-training for natural language generation, translation, and comprehension. arXiv preprint
     arXiv:1910.13461, 2019.

[30] Alexander Maedche and Steffen Staab. Measuring similarity between ontologies. In Asunción
     Gómez-Pérez and V. Richard Benjamins, editors, Knowledge Engineering and Knowledge
     Management: Ontologies and the Semantic Web, pages 251–263, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2002.
     Springer Berlin Heidelberg. ISBN 978-3-540-45810-4.

[31] Christopher D Manning, Mihai Surdeanu, John Bauer, Jenny Rose Finkel, Steven Bethard, and
     David McClosky. The stanford corenlp natural language processing toolkit. In Proceedings of
     52nd annual meeting of the association for computational linguistics: system demonstrations,
     pages 55–60, 2014.

[32] Silvano Martello and Paolo Toth. Linear assignment problems. In North-Holland Mathematics
     Studies, volume 132, pages 259–282. Elsevier, 1987.

[33] George A Miller. Wordnet: a lexical database for english. Communications of the ACM, 38(11):
     39–41, 1995.


                                               12


===== PDF PAGE 13 =====
[34] Ron Milo, Shai Shen-Orr, Shalev Itzkovitz, Nadav Kashtan, Dmitri Chklovskii, and Uri Alon.
     Network motifs: simple building blocks of complex networks. Science, 298(5594):824–827,
     2002.
[35] Simone Paolo Ponzetto, Michael Strube, et al. Deriving a large scale taxonomy from wikipedia.
     In AAAI, volume 7, pages 1440–1445, 2007.
[36] Robert Porzel and Rainer Malaka. A task-based approach for ontology evaluation. In ECAI
     Workshop on Ontology Learning and Population, Valencia, Spain, volume 1. Citeseer Valencia,
     Spain, 2004.
[37] Joe Raad and Christophe Cruz. A survey on ontology evaluation methods. In Proceedings of
     the International Conference on Knowledge Engineering and Ontology Development, part of
     the 7th International Joint Conference on Knowledge Discovery, Knowledge Engineering and
     Knowledge Management, 2015.
[38] Nils Reimers and Iryna Gurevych. Sentence-bert: Sentence embeddings using siamese bert-
     networks. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
     Processing. Association for Computational Linguistics, 11 2019. URL http://arxiv.org/
     abs/1908.10084.
[39] Stephen Roller, Douwe Kiela, and Maximilian Nickel. Hearst patterns revisited: Automatic
     hypernym detection from large text corpora. arXiv preprint arXiv:1806.03191, 2018.
[40] Schema.org. Schema.org, 2011. URL https://www.schema.org/.
[41] Shai S Shen-Orr, Ron Milo, Shmoolik Mangan, and Uri Alon. Network motifs in the transcrip-
     tional regulation network of escherichia coli. Nature genetics, 31(1):64–68, 2002.
[42] Philipp Sorg and Philipp Cimiano. Exploiting wikipedia for cross-lingual and multilingual
     information retrieval. Data & Knowledge Engineering, 74:26–45, 2012.
[43] Jiankai Sun, Deepak Ajwani, Patrick K Nicholson, Alessandra Sala, and Srinivasan
     Parthasarathy. Breaking cycles in noisy hierarchies. In Proceedings of the 2017 ACM on
     Web Science Conference, pages 151–160, 2017.
[44] Milena Trajanoska, Riste Stojanov, and Dimitar Trajanov. Enhancing knowledge graph con-
     struction using large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.04676, 2023.
[45] Pucktada Treeratpituk, Madian Khabsa, and C. Lee Giles. Graph-based approach to auto-
     matic taxonomy generation (grabtax). ArXiv, abs/1307.1718, 2013. URL https://api.
     semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:8625171.
[46] Anne-Marie Vercoustre, Jovan Pehcevski, and James A Thom. Using wikipedia categories and
     links in entity ranking. In Focused Access to XML Documents: 6th International Workshop
     of the Initiative for the Evaluation of XML Retrieval, INEX 2007 Dagstuhl Castle, Germany,
     December 17-19, 2007. Selected Papers 6, pages 321–335. Springer, 2008.
[47] Wenhui Wang, Furu Wei, Li Dong, Hangbo Bao, Nan Yang, and Ming Zhou. Minilm: Deep
     self-attention distillation for task-agnostic compression of pre-trained transformers. Advances
     in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:5776–5788, 2020.
[48] Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten Bosma, Fei Xia, Ed Chi, Quoc V Le,
     Denny Zhou, et al. Chain-of-thought prompting elicits reasoning in large language models.
     Advances in neural information processing systems, 35:24824–24837, 2022.
[49] Felix Wu, Amauri Souza, Tianyi Zhang, Christopher Fifty, Tao Yu, and Kilian Weinberger.
     Simplifying graph convolutional networks. In International conference on machine learning,
     pages 6861–6871. PMLR, 2019.
[50] Jiaxuan You, Rex Ying, Xiang Ren, William Hamilton, and Jure Leskovec. Graphrnn: Generat-
     ing realistic graphs with deep auto-regressive models. In International conference on machine
     learning, pages 5708–5717. PMLR, 2018.


                                                13


===== PDF PAGE 14 =====
[51] Elias Zavitsanos, Georgios Paliouras, and George A. Vouros. Gold standard evaluation of
     ontology learning methods through ontology transformation and alignment. IEEE Trans-
     actions on Knowledge and Data Engineering, 23:1635–1648, 2011. URL https://api.
     semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:15607684.
[52] Torsten Zesch and Iryna Gurevych. Analysis of the wikipedia category graph for nlp applications.
     In Proceedings of the Second Workshop on TextGraphs: Graph-Based Algorithms for Natural
     Language Processing, pages 1–8, 2007.




                                                 14


===== PDF PAGE 15 =====
A     Appendix / supplemental material

A.1     Experiment details

A.1.1    Wikipedia
Some prior works that use Wikipedia categories as a dataset perform additional filtering of concepts
considered as “meta-categories” mainly used for page management [35]. We instead decided not to
further filter the source data to minimise external bias. We note that it is often not clear-cut whether a
Wikipedia category is just for page management. For example, the Wikipedia categories of the form
“Lists of [subject]” refer to the special type of articles where the main body is a bullet point/table
listing of the subject, which is a useful concept in the Wikipedia domain.

A.1.2    OLLM
For the Wikipedia experiment, we use Mistral 7B v0.2 (not instruction-tuned) [21] as the base model.
We attach LoRA [20] adaptors to all attention and feed-forward layers with parameters r = 32 and
α = 16. The model is trained for 2 epochs (≈ 17K steps) with batch size 16, context length 2048,
and is optimised with Adam using a constant learning rate of 1e-5 with warm-up from zero for the
first 100 steps. Finetune uses the same configuration. Training takes 12 A100-hours.
For the arXiv experiment, we further finetune the model trained on Wikipedia with masked loss
objective on 2048 document-subgraph pairs from the arXiv training set. We merge the LoRA adaptors
from the Wikipedia experiment and initialise new ones with r = 8 and α = 8. The model is trained
with batch size 16 and Adam with constant learning rate 3e-6 and warp-up from zero for the first 10
steps. Training terminates when the loss stops improving on the evaluation set, which happened at
step 288. Finetune (transfer) uses the same configuration. Early stopping happened at step 192.
For both experiments, we finetune the model with the instruction template similar to that of Mistral
7B instruct v0.2. The format is shown below:

<s>[INST]\
Title: {{ title }}
{{ abstract }}[/INST]\
{% for path in paths %}
{{ path | join(" -> ") }}
{% endfor %}\
</s>


                         Figure 5: Linearisation template for OLLM training.

For inference, we use the vLLM [28] server which achieves a throughput of ≈ 10 documents per
second. Inference on the validation and test splits of both datasets takes 12 A100-hours in total.

A.1.3    Hearst
The Hearst baseline follows the implementation by Roller et al. [39]. Using the tokenization, part-
of-speech tagging, lemmatisation, and token regex functionality of the CoreNLP pipeline [31],
taxonomic relations are extracted according to the 28 Hearst patterns used by the authors. Processing
all documents takes 10 CPU-hours.
Following the spmi method, low-rank smoothing is applied to the relation matrix to allow com-
parison between any two concepts even if they are not directly related by an extracted rela-
tion. The rank of the smoothed matrix, r, is a hyperparameter which we tune by sweeping over
r ∈ {5, 10, 15, 20, 25, 50, 100, 150, 200, 250} on the validation set. This defines a dense weighted
graph as the raw output. Unfortunately, computing Continuous F1 on a dense graph is very slow,
especially for Wikipedia. This is because the Hungarian algorithm used for solving the optimal
matching between edges has time complexity O(N 3 ), where N is the number of edges. To bypass
this issue, we perform a pre-filtering step of only exporting the top 10|V | weighted edges in the
smoothed relation matrix, where |V | is the number of nodes in the graph. For the datasets considered,


                                                   15


===== PDF PAGE 16 =====
this density of edges is still much higher than that of the ground truth, and thus, we expect this to
have minimal impact on the final output after post-processing.

A.1.4   REBEL
We use REBEL-large [7] in the implementation. The model is an encoder-decoder transformer based
on BART-large [29] with 406M parameters. We sample the model with the default configuration used
by Cabot and Navigli [7]. The model is trained to predict 220 types of relations, most of which are
not taxonomic relations. We filter the extracted relations and only keep those tagged with “subclass
of”, “instance of”, “member of”, and “part of” relation types. The same low-rank smoothing method
as Hearst is applied to the raw extractions. Processing all documents takes 3 A100-hours.

A.1.5   Prompting
To obtain more comparable results, we use Mistral 7B Instruct v0.2, the instruction-tuned version of
the base model of OLLM, as the LLM for our prompting baseline. For One-shot and Three-shot, we
randomly sample examples from the training set for each query. The output is parsed using regex
and results that do not match the regex are discarded. We perform manual prompt engineering by
inspecting individual responses. The final prompt template is shown in Figure 6. The total inference
cost for all prompting baselines is ≈ 50 A100-hours.




                                                 16


===== PDF PAGE 17 =====
The following is an article’s title and abstract. Your task is to assign this
    article to suitable category hierarchy. A category is typically represented by
    a word or a short phrase, representing broader topics/concepts that the article
     is about. A category hierarchy represented by a collection of paths from the
    generic root category "Main topic classifications" to a specific category
    suitable for the article. The topics titles should become more and more
    specific as you move from the root to the leaf.

{% if examples|length > 0 %}
{% for example in examples %}
### EXAMPLE {{ loop.index }} ###
### ARTICLE ###
Title: {{ example[’title’] }}
{{ example[’abstract’] }}
### END ARTICLE ###
{% for path in example[’paths’] %}
{{ path | join(" -> ") }}
{% endfor %}
### END EXAMPLE {{ loop.index }} ###
{% endfor %}
{% else %}
You must answer in the format of:
Main topic classifications -> Broad topic 1 -> Subtopic 1 -> ... -> Most specific
    topic 1
Main topic classifications -> Borad topic 2 -> Subtopic 2 -> ... -> Most specific
    topic 2
...
{% endif %}

### ARTICLE ###
Title: {{ title }}
{{ abstract }}
### END ARTICLE ###

Provide a category hierarchy for the above article. \
{% if examples|length > 0 %}
Use the same format as the examples above.
{% else %}
Use the format described above.
{% endif %}


             Figure 6: Prompt template used for the Zero/One/Three-shot baselines.


A.1.6   Hyperparameters
The raw generated outputs of all methods are post-processed with the same scheme as described
in Section 3.2. The best hyperparameters for the post-processing step found by grid search on the
validation are reported in Table 2.




                                               17


===== PDF PAGE 18 =====
      Table 2: Values of the best hyperparameters found by grid search. r is the rank of the
      low-rank smoothing, only applicable to Hearst and REBEL. α = β = 0 means no edges
      are pruned from the raw output apart from self-loop and inverse edge removal.
                   Dataset     Method                 α           β           r
                    Wikipedia   Memorisation          0            0.058489    -
                                Hearst                0.786685     0           5
                                REBEL                 0.872544     0           20
                                Zero-shot             0.976781     0.298107    -
                                One-shot              0.990906     0.346684    -
                                Three-shot            0.991955     0.530957    -
                                Finetune              0.883848     0.058489    -
                                OLLM                  0.974330     0.025893    -
                    arXiv       Memorisation          0.340246     0           -
                                Hearst                0.595878     0           150
                                REBEL                 0.836685     0           100
                                Zero-shot             0.999896     0.346684    -
                                One-shot              0.999611     0.401187    -
                                Three-shot            0.999851     0.298107    -
                                Finetune (transfer)   0.988129     0.346684    -
                                OLLM (transfer)       0.983681     0.123872    -



A.2     Ablations

In this section, we present the results of our ablations regarding output consistency, the benefits of
more advanced prompting techniques, and a comparison against LLMs4OL [4].

A.2.1    Consistency

A common assumption of taxonomic relations is its transitivity and anti-symmetry. One limitation of
many OL methods, including OLLM, is that they do not guarantee that the generated ontology is cycle-
free, leading to inconsistent taxonomic relations. To achieve consistency, generic post-processing
techniques [43] can be applied to remove such cycles.
We analysed the ontologies generated by OLLM and found only 97 simple cycles in Wikipedia
and none in arXiv. Using the greedy algorithm of repeatedly removing the edge that breaks the
most simple cycles (a heuristic to the smallest set of edges whose removal makes the graph acyclic),
we prune all such cycles and make the ontology consistent by removing just 26 of 10414 edges
in Wikipedia. This is surprising considering we did not explicitly optimise our model to satisfy
consistency.

A.2.2    Chain of thought prompting

More sophisticated prompting techniques, such as chain-of-thought (CoT) [48] have been shown
to bring significant improvements in LLM inference. We explore whether we can establish strong
baselines here by employing CoT in our prompting methods.
We extend the zero-shot prompting method such that prediction now involves two rounds of inference:
In the first round, we ask the model to describe the possible relevant concepts for the input document
and to explain its reasoning. Then, we ask the model to predict the subgraph in the specified format
given the additional, self-generated context. The prompts used are shown below:
We tested the CoT method on Wikipedia and found no significant difference from basic zero-shot
prompting, as shown in Table 3. We attribute this to the fact that CoT prompting primarily aims to
improve logic and reasoning. We hypothesise that the performance in OL is more dependent on the
model’s understanding of natural language than its ability to perform multi-step reasoning, hence we
do not observe any significant improvement from CoT.


                                                 18


===== PDF PAGE 19 =====
The following is an article’s title and abstract. Briefly break down the topics (
    both specific and general concepts) relevant to this article. Explain your
    reasoning step by step.

### ARTICLE ###
Title: {{ title }}
{{ abstract }}
### END ARTICLE ###


                               Figure 7: Chain-of-thought first prompt

Your task now is to assign this article to a suitable category hierarchy. A category
     is typically represented by a word or a short phrase, representing broader
    topics/concepts that the article is about. A category hierarchy is represented
    by a collection of paths from the generic root category "Main topic
    classifications" to a specific category suitable for the article. The topic
    titles should become more and more specific as you move from the root to the
    leaf.

You must answer in the format of:
Main topic classifications -> Broad topic 1 -> Subtopic 1 -> ... -> Most specific
    topic 1
Main topic classifications -> Broad topic 2 -> Subtopic 2 -> ... -> Most specific
    topic 2
...


                              Figure 8: Chain-of-thought second prompt


A.2.3   Comparison against LLMs4OL
In this ablation, we evaluate whether the improvement by OLLM is due to the improved methodology
(end-to-end modelling) or simply due to the use of LLMs. One way to construct ontologies with
LLMs proposed by LLMs4OL is to first prompt LLMs for possible concepts in a document, then link
prediction by prompting for a yes/no response. Unfortunately, constructing a baseline from such two
subtasks is non-trivial. We encountered significant scalability issues in the link prediction stage as it
required O(n2 ) inferences. We make two modifications to overcome such limitation:

1. After the concept discovery stage, we only discard all but the n most frequent concepts to limit
   the number of inferences required during link prediction, where n is the number of concepts in the
   ground truth.
2. Instead of using zero-shot Mistral 7B as the link predictor, we use a finetuned BERT as the link
   predictor as it runs much faster. Given that LLMs4OL demonstrated that finetuned models perform
   much better than zero-shot inference on link prediction, we expect the finetuned BERT to be at
   least as good, if not better, than zero-shot Mistral 7B on this subtask.

We design this ablation such that it is comparable to zero-shot end-to-end modelling: both use
zero-shot Mistral 7B as the backbone, just utilised in different ways. We tested this method on
Wikipedia and found that it is worse than zero-shot end-to-end modelling on all metrics except Motif
Distance, as shown in Table 4. This is evidence that our end-to-end modelling approach is a clear
improvement over traditional subtask-based OL. Not only does LLMs4OL suffer from significant
scalability bottlenecks thus unlikely to be scalable to solve large problems, its performance is also
worse. The results suggest that we can more effectively and efficiently leverage the capabilities of
LLMs beyond just solving subtasks, such as by predicting subgraphs.




                                                   19


===== PDF PAGE 20 =====
Table 3: Comparison of Zero-shot with and without chain-of-thought prompting. There is no
significant difference in performance.
 Dataset                            Method                                                Literal F1 ↑                                         Fuzzy F1 ↑                                                Cont. F1 ↑                                              Graph F1 ↑                                             Motif Dist. ↓
 Wikipedia Zero-shot     0.007                                                                                                                 0.871                                                     0.455                                                   0.639                                                  0.341
           Zero-shot CoT 0.007                                                                                                                 0.873                                                     0.449                                                   0.635                                                  0.357


Table 4: Comparison of Zero-shot end-to-end modelling and LLMs4OL-style modelling with zero-
shot concept discovery and fine-tuned BERT link prediction. LLMs4OL generally performs worse
than zero-shot.
Dataset                        Method                                Literal F1 ↑                                              Fuzzy F1 ↑                                                     Cont. F1 ↑                                                    Graph F1 ↑                                                   Motif Dist. ↓
Wikipedia Zero-shot 0.007                                                                                                      0.871                                                          0.455                                                         0.639                                                        0.341
          LLMs4OL 0.003                                                                                                        0.841                                                          0.428                                                         0.482                                                        0.092



A.3          Visualising evaluation metrics

A.3.1              Visualisation of node matching in Graph F1


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Subcellular Processes
                                                                                                                                                                           Statistical Mechanics                                                                                    Cell Behavior
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Molecular Networks
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Other Quantitative Biology
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Populations and Evolution

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Quantitative Methods



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Neurons and Cognition

                                                                                                                                      Condensed Matter                                                                                               Biological Evolution
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Tissues and Organs
                                           Mathematical Systems Theory
                                  Mathematical Logic
                        Mathematical Physics
                                                                                                       Computational Physics                                                                                                                            Quantitative Biology
                                                                                              Quantum Physics                                                                                                                                                                  Neuroscience                  Genomics
           Mathematics and Society

                 Mathematical Systems and Control
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Biological Data
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Biomolecules
   Mathematical Logic and Foundations

                                                                  Mathematics                                                                                                                                                                                                         Biological Data Science
                                                                                                Group Theory                   Physics
                                                Dynamical Systems
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Life Sciences
                                             Logic                              Mathematical Physics
                            Numerical Analysis                         Quantum Algebra
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Health
            General Mathematics

                     Optimization and Control                                             Category Theory
                                          K-Theory and Homology
            Number Theory

                                                                                                                                            Analysis

                                                                                                 General Topology

      Complex Variables

                                                                                                                                Information Theory
                        Metric Geometry                                                   Representation Theory
              Probability
                                                            Mathematics
  Algebraic Topology                                                                                                                                    Main topic classifications
                                                                                                                                                                                     Main topic classifications
                                                                                                                    Combinatorics
               Symplectic Geometry

                                                                                       Electrical Engineering and Systems Science                                      Machine Learning
   Geometric Topology
                         Commutative Algebra
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Artificial Intelligence
           Rings and Algebras                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Portfolio Management

                                                                        Classical Analysis and ODEs                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Risk Management
                        Algebraic Geometry                                                  History and Overview
          Differential Geometry
                                                Spectral Theory
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Quantitative Finance
                                                                      Signal Processing                     Differential Equations                                                                                                                                                                                               Computational Finance
                            Operator Algebras                                                                                                                                                                                            Economics
                                                                                                                                      Information Systems
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Trading and Market Microstructure                           Statistical Finance
                                                                    Information Theory
                                                Analysis of PDEs                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Pricing of Securities
                                                                                                                  Statistics Theory


                                                         Functional Analysis                                                                                                   Information
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Economics and Finance            General Finance Mathematical Finance

                                                                                                Information Systems Theory
                                                                     Partial Differential Equations
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Econometrics             General Economics
                                                                                                                                      Data Analysis




                                                                                                                                                                              Statistics


                                                                                       Time Series Analysis                                                                                             Information Technology


                                                                                                                                                                                           Information Retrieval




                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Methodology

                                                                                                                                                Data Mining
                                                                                                                                                                                                     Applications
                                                                                                                                Statistical Inference
                                                                                                                                                                    Machine Learning
                                                                                                                                                              Computation
                                                                                                                                                                                           Other Statistics




Figure 9: Highest scoring node matching from the Graph F1 metric between the ontology generated
by OLLM (teal) and the ground truth ontology (black). The matching between nodes is shown in
red, where the opacity of the edge indicates the similarity score (weaker links are more transparent).
Visually, the matching defines a clear alignment of the two graphs: from the centre to the left we
have the Mathematics-related concepts; at the top right we have Biology-related concepts; and at the
bottom right we have Economics-related concepts.




                                                                                                                                                                       20


===== PDF PAGE 21 =====
A.3.2            Visualisation of edge matching in Continuous F1


                                                              Pricing of Securities
                                                                           Portfolio Management

                                               Risk Management
                                                                                 Trading and Market Microstructure


                                      Statistical Finance




                                       General Economics


                            General Finance                                                                                                                                   Computation
                                                                                                                                                      Data Mining
                                                                                              Computational Finance
                                                                       Quantitative Finance                                                                                                      Machine Learning


                                                                                                                                                           Statistical Inference
                                    Econometrics
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Methodology
                                                               Mathematical Finance

                       Economics and Finance
                                                                                                              Statistical Mechanics            Other Statistics                                       Information Retrieval




                                                                       Economics                                                                                             Statistics                        Information Technology


                                                                                                                                         Data Analysis

                    Mathematical Logic and Foundations                                                                              Health


                                                                                                          Time Series Analysis                                                                              Applications

                                                                                                                                                                                   Information

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Populations and Evolution Biomolecules
                                       Mathematical Systems Theory
                                                                                                                                             Main topic classifications                                                                 Biological Evolution

                                                                                                                            Condensed Matter
                                                                                                                                       Statistics Theory
                   Mathematics and Society                                                        Analysis of PDEs                                                                                                                                                                         Subcellular Processes



                                                    Mathematics
                                                                          Dynamical Systems
                  Mathematical Logic                    General Mathematics                                        Main topic classifications                                                                                                                                                 Quantitative Methods
                                                                                                                                                                  Information Systems

                                                                     Operator Algebras                                                                                                                                                                 Quantitative Biology             Genomics
                                                                                                                                                             Analysis                                                 Life Sciences
   Mathematical Systems and Control                   Logic
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Biological Data Science

                                                   Classical Analysis and ODEs                    Information Theory                           Representation Theory
                Mathematical Physics                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Tissues and Organs


                                          Electrical Engineering and Systems Science

                        Optimization and Control                                                                                                Metric Geometry            Information Systems Theory                                                                                     Molecular Networks
                                            History and Overview                                  Artificial Intelligence
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Biological Data
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Other Quantitative Biology    Cell Behavior
                                                                 Differential Equations   Mathematics
                                                                                                  Machine Learning                                                                                                                                              Neurons and Cognition
                                            Mathematical Physics              Number Theory                                                                                                                                                Neuroscience
                                                                                                                                                   Physics Category Theory
                Signal Processing

                                                                                                                            Complex Variables
                                                                                                               General Topology           Group Theory
                               Functional Analysis

                                                                                                                                          Probability



                    Partial Differential Equations Rings and Algebras

                                       Differential Geometry
                                                                                                                 Combinatorics
                                                                 Algebraic Topology                                                                                 Quantum Physics

                                                   K-Theory and Homology                                                           Quantum Algebra
                                                                                        Information Theory
                                                                        Commutative Algebra
                                                                                                                     Numerical Analysis
                                                               Algebraic Geometry                                                                  Computational Physics
                                                                                                            Spectral Theory

                                                                                       Symplectic Geometry
                                                                            Geometric Topology




Figure 10: Highest scoring edge matching from the Continuous F1 metric between the ontology
generated by OLLM (teal) and the ground truth ontology (black). The matching between edges is
shown in red, where the opacity of the edge indicates the similarity score (weaker links are more
transparent). Visually, the matching defines a clear alignment of the two graphs: in the bottom left
and centre we have the Mathematics-related concepts; at the right we have Biology-related concepts;
and at the top left we have Economics-related concepts.


A.4        Visualisation of generated ontologies

A.4.1            Wikipedia
We include some generated outputs for Wikipedia here. Since the full generated output is too large to
visualise, we plot subgraphs of the output instead. We sample the subgraphs by the following method:

          1. Pick a random node in the generated graph.
          2. Get the induced subgraph by the 1-hop neighbourhood of the chosen node.
          3. Include the shortest path from the root “Main topic classifications” to the chosen node if
             such path exists.
          4. Repeat from step 1 if the subgraph has more than 30 nodes or less than 5 nodes.

We apply the filtering step (step 4) as subgraphs with too many nodes are difficult to inspect manually,
and those with too few are uninformative. For Hearst, we choose the filtering upper bound to be 50
nodes as we fail to find subgraphs smaller than 30 nodes quickly. We additionally colour each edge
black if it occurs literally in the training graph, blue if it occurs literally in the test graph, and red
otherwise.



                                                                                                                                                         21


===== PDF PAGE 22 =====
                                                                                                                  Biology organizations
                                   Biographies of biologists                                                                                               Biological research stubs


                                                                                                    Biology stubs


                                                                           Biological evolution


                                                                                                                                    Biological research
                                                                                                                                                                      Biotechnology

                                                                                                                  Biology
                                                            Life
       Main topic classifications

                                                                                Biological classification

                                                                                                                                                                Biological concepts
                                                                                                                                Biologists




                                                  Biology lists
                                                                                                  Biology organisations
                                                                                                                                                       Biology-related lists




                                                                                      (a) Biology

                                                                         Language policy stubs

                                          Language reform                                          Language policy by country                                              Language laws
                                                                                                                                Language policy organizations




   Main topic classifications




                                                                         Language teaching




                                                                                                         Language policy
                                                                                                                                                                        Multilingual education
                                            Language                                                                                Language legislation




                                                                             Language advocacy




            Language law


                                                                                                                                Language planning                    Language standardization
                                                                                        Language advocacy organizations
                                                       Language rights




                                                                             (b) Language policy



                                Algebraic structures            Mathematical objects                    Topological spaces




          Mathematical categories                              Mathematical structures                            Mathematics                    Main topic classifications




                                       Algebras
                                                                                                      Groups (mathematics)
                                                                     Ordered sets




                                                                    (c) Mathematical structures
Figure 11: Sub-ontologies for Wikipedia generated by OLLM, centred on various topics.



                                                                                                 22


===== PDF PAGE 23 =====
                                                   Energy crises
          Carbon finance                                                                                             Energy consumption

                                                                                     Energy conservation


                                                                                                                                                              Main topic classifications




                                                                 Energy economics


Energy companies
                              Renewable energy economy
                                                                                                                                 Energy
                                                                                               Energy policy




                                                               Energy policy organizations


                                                                                                                                                       Energy accidents and incidents

 Alternative energy economy

                                             Energy economists                                            Fuel economy




                                                                    (a) Energy economics



                                                                                                  Internet activism stubs




    Main topic classifications               Politics             Political activism               Internet activism                 Internet activism organizations




                                                                                                      Internet activists




                                                                     (b) Internet activism

                                                                          Mathematical proofs
                                         Theorem proofs
       Proof theory
                                                                                                                      Real numbers

                                                                                                                                                                   Concepts




                                                                                  Mathematical concepts

                                  Theorems

                                                             Mathematical theorems


Mathematical theories                                                                                     Theories



                                       Scientific theories


                                                                                                                         Linguistic theories and hypotheses
                                                                                                                                                                Main topic classifications

                                                                         Theories of history

         Social theories
                                                                                                     Philosophical theories
                                         Theories of everything




                                                                             (c) Theories
Figure 12: Sub-ontologies for Wikipedia generated by Finetune, centred on various topics.




                                                                                       23


===== PDF PAGE 24 =====
                                                                Goods (economics)
                                        Furniture
     Coins                                                                                      Historical objects              Archaeological artifacts




                                                        Buildings and structures

                                   Exonumia


                                                                                   Satellites
    Steles                                                                                                                          Main topic classifications
                                                                                                             Culture
                                                    Artificial objects



                                    Vehicles
                                                                    Ceremonial objects




   Machines
                                                                                                    Flags                         Synthetic biology
                                   Works of art     Genetically modified organisms




                                                               (a) Aritificial objects



                                                    Confidence tricks




              Internet fraud             Fraud                             Deception        Human behavior             Main topic classifications




                                                         Fake news




                                                                         (b) Fraud



                                                                         Nature spirits

               Light and religion       Sacred natural sites

                                                                                       Animism




              Water and religion               Nature and religion                                                     Main topic classifications
                                                                                                        Religion



                                                                           Nature deities



                 Sanamahism
                                           Fire in religion

                                                                             Animals in religion




                                                              (c) Nature and religion
Figure 13: Sub-ontologies for Wikipedia generated by Memorisation, centred on various topics.



                                                                             24


===== PDF PAGE 25 =====
                                                                                                                           Information
                                                                                           Republicans
                                                                                                                                                                                                     Concepts
             Human rights organizations                                                                                                      Millennium Development Goals
                                                               Venues




                                                                                                                           Materials

                                                                                            Nurses                                                                                              Action games
                                                                                                                                                            Women
                   Earth sciences


                                                        Social networks
                                                                                                                        Government



                                                                                              Drugs                                                                                                       Suicides
                                                                                                                                                            Weapons


                                                                                                                           Animals
                      Languages

                                                             Social sciences

                                                                                                                                                                                              Entities
                                                                                                      Wikis                                      Leisure




                       Plants
                                                              Sources
                                                                                                                World Health Organization                                                                Places
                                                                                                                                                            Skeptics
                                                                                            Explorers




                                                                                                 (a) Drugs

                                                                                              Sources
                                                                                                                           Wikis
                         World Health Organization
                                                                                                                                                                           Social sciences
                                                                      Explorers

                                                                                                                                                 Plants




                                                                                                 Leisure

                                      Skeptics                                                                      Social networks
                                                                         Places
                                                                                                                                                                             Languages


                                                                                                                                           Earth sciences

                                                                                             Government



                                                                  Action games                                     Animals
                             Weapons



                                                                                                                                                                                 Nurses

                                                                                                                                         Republicans

                                                 Entities                Millennium Development Goals
                                                                                                                Women




                                 Concepts                                                                                                         Venues               Human rights organizations
                                                                      Suicides
                                                                                             Information                Materials




                                                                                       (b) Government

                                                        Linguistics                   Women's health               Social networks                     Explorers
                                                                                                                                                                                          Skeptics
                  Religious studies




                                                                                                                                         Venues
                                                                                                       Plants
                                                                         Social sciences                                                               Human rights organizations
                                             Chinese people                                                                                                                                   Nurses

                                                                                                                       Languages

               American people


                                                                                      Earth sciences                                              Drugs
                                                                                                           Companies
                                                                 Street theatre                                             Construction                               Animals                Materials
                                         Animatronics



                                                                                             Concepts
                                                                                                                                    Government             Muslims
            Professional wrestling                                                                                Games
                                                                          Society                                                                                                  World Health Organization
                                         Government of Vietnam

                                                                                            Sources                                                                  Republicans
                                                                                                                              People
                                                                                                                                              Information
                                                                                                              Places


                     Polish people
                                                            Scientists                                                                                                           Millennium Development Goals

                                                                                      Entities
                                                                                                                                       Weapons                     Women
                                                                                                                Suicides




                  Outer space                Mathematicians
                                                                           Dentists                                                                                                       Action games
                                                                                              Voyager program                  Leisure                      Wikis




                                                                                              (c) Society
Figure 14: Sub-ontologies for Wikipedia generated by Hearst, centred on various topics.
                                                                                                           25


===== PDF PAGE 26 =====
                                                                                                                                        Portuguese people
                                                 Japanese people                                   Computational mathematics
                                                                                   Geometry                                                                                                                    Arithmetic
                                                                                                                                                                       Game theory
   Main topic classifications




                                                                                                                                  Order theory
                                                                                         Lithuanian people


                                                Experimental mathematics
                                                                                                                                                                                                             Combinatorics
                                                                                                                                                               Elementary mathematics




                                                                                                             Elections

                                                                                                                               Sustainable Development Goals
         Nauruan people                                                            Algebra




                                                                                                                 British people                                                                              Polish people
                                                  Vietnamese people                                                                                                Azerbaijani people



                                                                                         Irish people
                                                                                                                                            KDE




      Mathematical software

                                                                                                                                                                                                           Circassian people
                                                        Medical software                                                                                    Engineers Without Borders
                                                                                      Recreational mathematics              Chinese people




                                                                                               (a) Elections


                                                      Recreational mathematics                 Game theory                        Computer engineering
                        Philosophy of culture                                                                                                                                        Combinatorics




                                                                                                        Mathematical software
                                                                             Pedagogy                                                         Natural language processing

                                         Medical software




                                                                                             Money                                      Arithmetic
                                                                                                                                                                                Main topic classifications

                                                                                                               Social sciences
                   Experimental mathematics
                                                                   Algebra

                                                                                                                                              Elementary mathematics
                                                                                        Computational mathematics




                                                                                                                                                                                Speech recognition
                                     Geometry                Philosophy of mind
                                                                                                                                       Order theory
                                                                                                 Secularism




                                                                                                 (b) Money

                                                                    Elementary mathematics
                                Order theory                                                                                                 Arithmetic
                                                                                                                                                                                Experimental mathematics
                                                                                                     Mathematical software




                                                                Game theory




                                                                                                                                                      Algebra
                 Main topic classifications                                                   Vocal music                Engineering                                               Computational mathematics




                                                                      Life




                                                                                                             Marketing                     Medical software
                                 Geometry                                                                                                                                       Recreational mathematics
                                                                             Combinatorics




                                                                                             (c) Vocal music
Figure 15: Sub-ontologies for Wikipedia generated by REBEL, centred on various topics.

                                                                                                             26


===== PDF PAGE 27 =====
                  Prisons                       Prisons and Corrections                       Trials                     Sentencing                         Trials and Sentencing




Main topic classifications              Social Issues                     Corrections
                                                                                               Criminal Justice System   Law Enforcement Agencies               Prisons and Prisoners




      Prisons and Penitentiaries                Police Misconduct                   Law Enforcement                 Capital Punishment                 Corrections and Rehabilitation




                                                             (a) Criminal Justice System



                             People                                 Danish Politics
                                                                                                          Greenland                       Danish Government




                                                        Athletes



     Main topic classifications
                                                                                        Denmark                  Danish Football
                                                                                                                                            University of Copenhagen


                                            Political History




            Government and Politics                                                                     Copenhagen
                                                             Danish History                                                                     Regions




                                                                              (b) Denmark



                                                                                        Supervised Learning
                                      Computer Science
                                                                                                                                                    Deep Learning




                                                                                                       Machine Learning

       Main topic classifications



                                                                                                                                                    Neural Networks
                                          Natural Language Processing
                                                                                                       Pattern Recognition




                                                                    (c) Machine Learning
Figure 16: Sub-ontologies for Wikipedia generated by Zero-shot, centred on various topics.



                                                                                         27


===== PDF PAGE 28 =====
                                                 World Championships
                 Track and field
                                                                                         Competitions




                                                   Events
  Track and Field



                                                                       Sports
                                     Athletics

                                                                                                  Main topic classifications




       Countries
                                                         Running
                         Long-distance running                                    Football




                                                          (a) Athletics



                                                   Criminal law               Nationality law
             International law
                                                                                                      Administrative law




                                                   Law                     Legal studies




   Main topic classifications
                                                                                                        Comparative law

                                                         Constitutional law
                                   Legal history                                  Jurisprudence




                                                     (b) Legal studies



                                             Human physiology                 Muscle physiology
                                                                                                    Cardiovascular system




   Main topic classifications      Science                   Biology            Physiology




                                                                                                         Metabolism

                                             Respiratory system               Neurophysiology




                                                         (c) Physiology
Figure 17: Sub-ontologies for Wikipedia generated by One-shot, centred on various topics.

                                                               28


===== PDF PAGE 29 =====
                                                                                        Space technology
                                                         Satellites
                     Space exploration

                                                                                                                           Technology



                                                         Aerospace technology                                                              Main topic classifications




                             Spacecraft
                                                                                        Rocket technology




                                                                        (a) Aerospace technology


                                            Natural language processing
                                                                                                        Speech recognition
                                                                                                                                                              Technology
   Neural networks




                                       Machine learning              Artificial intelligence and machine learning




                                                                                                                                                              Main topic classifications

     Computer vision                                                                                     Knowledge representation and reasoning


                                                         Knowledge representation




                                                 (b) Artificial intelligence and machine learning

                                                                      By-elections
                                                                                                     Opinion polling
    Electoral systems                   Campaigns
                                                                                                                                        Australia                 Electoral commissions




                                                                  Parliamentary elections


                                                                                                General elections
            Voting systems                      Voting




                                                                                                                        United States
                                                                            Elections                                                               History
                                                                                                                                                                        Main topic classifications



                              United States elections
Presidential elections
                                                                                                    Political figures


                                                          State elections
                                                                                        India




                                                                                                                                         France
                                                                                                                                                                 Election administration
       Local elections                 Voter turnout
                                                                                                    Provincial elections
                                                                     Voting methods




                                                                                        (c) Elections
Figure 18: Sub-ontologies for Wikipedia generated by Three-shot, centred on various topics.


                                                                                                  29


===== PDF PAGE 30 =====
A.4.2         arXiv
                                                                                                                                               Computational Finance

                                                                                                                                   General Economics              General Finance


                                                                                                                                                    Mathematical Finance

                                                                                                                                                                       Risk Management
                                                                                                                         Portfolio Management


                                                                                                                                                            Statistical Finance
                                                                                                                                            Quantitative Finance

                                                                                                                                                                        Pricing of Securities

                                      Algebraic Topology
                                 Logic
              Dynamical Systems                       Group Theory                                                                                  Trading and Market Microstructure

                                 Optimization and Control                                                    Other Statistics
       Category Theory
                         Spectral Theory                       Numerical Analysis

                                                                                                                                 Methodology
                                     Differential Geometry
          Mathematical Physics
                         Quantum Algebra            Geometric Topology
Rings and Algebras

                                                                   History and Overview                                                Machine Learning
                                                                                Statistics Theory                  Statistics
        Classical Analysis and ODEs Mathematics                                                     Main topic classifications
                                           Combinatorics
    Number Theory


                         Algebraic Geometry                    Operator Algebras
                                                                                                                                  Applications
          Symplectic Geometry
Functional Analysis
                                                 Complex Variables
                                                                  Metric Geometry                                Computation
                              Analysis of PDEs
                  Representation Theory
                                                                                                                                                                              Genomics
         General Topology                        Probability                                                                                          Other Quantitative Biology

                                                      Commutative Algebra
                         K-Theory and Homology
                General Mathematics
                                           Information Theory                                                                                                                      Biomolecules
                                                                                                                                                    Quantitative Biology
                                                                                                                                                                   Molecular Networks


                                                                                                                                  Subcellular Processes
                                                                                                                                                                             Neurons and Cognition
                                                                                                                                                       Tissues and Organs

                                                                                                                                                                           Cell Behavior
                                                                                                                                      Populations and Evolution

                                                                                                                                                          Quantitative Methods


                                              Figure 19: Ground truth test split ontology for arXiv




                                                                                               30


===== PDF PAGE 31 =====
                                                       Information Retrieval
                                         Information Technology

                                                                           Partial Differential Equations
                                                                                                                 Mathematical Systems Theory
                                                                                                   Mathematical Systems and Control


                              Information Systems Theory                                                                     Mathematics and Society
                                                       Information
                                                                                                                       Mathematical Logic

                 Neuroscience                                             Differential Equations
                                                                                                                Mathematics
      Biological Data                           Information Systems                                                       Mathematical Logic and Foundations


                                                                         Artificial Intelligence
                                                                                                                        Mathematical Physics
                            Life Sciences
Biological Data Science                                                             Machine Learning

                                                        Analysis
                                                               Main topic classifications
          Biological Evolution
                                                                               Electrical Engineering and Systems Science

                                                                                                                 Signal Processing
                                                          Information Theory
                                                                                 Health
                                            Economics

                       Econometrics


                                                                                                     Physics

                         Economics and Finance               Data Analysis                                       Quantum Physics




                                          Time Series Analysis                             Computational Physics
                                                                  Statistical Inference                    Condensed Matter

                                                          Data Mining



                                                                                                                         Statistical Mechanics

                                       Figure 20: Ontology for arXiv generated by OLLM



                                                                                                                                Information TheoryInformation




                                                 Biological Sciences

                                   Biology

                                                                                                           Economics and Finance
                                                                                                                               Economics



                                               Life Sciences




                                                                                             Computational Physics
                                                                                                               Biological Physics

                                         Economy
                                                                                 Methods in Physics


         Linguistics                            Main topic classifications                                              Condensed Matter

                                                                                                      Physics Statistical Mechanics



Anthropology            Humanities
                                                                               Quantum Physics
                                               Artificial Intelligence
                                                                                                                           Optics


                                                                                                         Fluid Dynamics
                                                                                          Nonlinear Science
   Medical Humanities
                            Politics

                                       Figure 21: Ontology for arXiv generated by Finetune



                                                                               31


===== PDF PAGE 32 =====
                               Strongly Correlated Electrons
                                                                                                                                                                                 Image and Video Processing
               Statistical Mechanics                                                                                                                                                               Audio and Speech Processing

                                                    Materials Science

                               Quantum Gases


Mesoscale and Nanoscale Physics                                                                                                                                                                                   Systems and Control

                                                                                                                                                                             Electrical Engineering and Systems Science

                   Superconductivity   Condensed Matter                                  High Energy Physics - Phenomenology

                                                                                 Chemical Physics              High Energy Physics - Lattice

                                                                                                                                                                                                            Signal Processing
     Soft Condensed Matter

                                                                                                                                                Main topic classifications
                                                                                             Instrumentation and Detectors
                                                                                                                    Physics and Society
                                                      General Relativity and Quantum Cosmology
                                                                                    Applied Physics                                                                          Economics
           Disordered Systems and Neural Networks




                                                                                                                     Plasma Physics
                                                          Mathematical Physics Optics                                             Biological Physics
                                                                                                     Physics




                                                                                                          High Energy Physics - Experiment
                                                           Nonlinear SciencesQuantum Physics                                       Fluid Dynamics

                                                                                                   Atomic Physics



                                                                        Nuclear Theory                                    Nuclear Experiment

                                                                                High Energy Physics - Theory
                                                                                                     Computational Physics




                                                                                                    Astrophysics


                                                                                                                 Cosmology and Nongalactic Astrophysics
                                                                 Astrophysics of Galaxies



                                                                                  High Energy Astrophysical Phenomena

                                                                                                   Instrumentation and Methods for Astrophysics
                                                                    Earth and Planetary Astrophysics


                                                                                               Solar and Stellar Astrophysics



                                             Figure 22: Ontology for arXiv generated by Memorisation




                                                                                                                    32


===== PDF PAGE 33 =====
                                                                                   Genomics


                           General Economics                                               Neurons and Cognition
                                                   Quantitative Finance
                                                                   General Mathematics
                                                                                                              Logic
                                                                                                                      Information Theory
                                         Category Theory
                                                                                       Portfolio Management
           Rings and Algebras                            Statistics Theory
                                                                    Quantitative Methods
                                                                                                          Biomolecules        Computation
                                   Number Theory

                                                                                   Mathematical Finance                        K-Theory and Homology
                                                                                                                   Molecular Networks
                                                        Classical Analysis and ODEs
                         Differential Geometry
     Analysis of PDEs

                                          Algebraic Geometry                                        Cell Behavior          Risk Management
                                                                                                                                       Operator Algebras

                     General Topology


                                  Quantum Algebra                                                                           MathematicsMetric Geometry
                                                                         Tissues and Organs
Commutative Algebra
             Trading and Market Microstructure                                Algebraic
                                                                        Machine LearningTopology
                                                                                                          Group Theory
                                                                                                                                  Statistics    Spectral Theory

               Subcellular Processes Computational Finance
                                                                                                                                     Symplectic Geometry

                                                                                                        Dynamical Systems
                        Mathematical Physics
                                                                                                                      Pricing of Securities
                                                                                         Geometric Topology
                                        Statistical Finance
                                                                                                                                       Complex Variables


                                                                     Probability
                        Optimization and Control                                                  Representation Theory          Other Statistics
                                                                                                                Populations and Evolution
                                                                          Quantitative Biology
                                                 Applications
                                   General Finance                                       Combinatorics
                                                                                                             Numerical Analysis
                                                                                               Main topic classifications

                                                     Functional Analysis
                                                                 History and Overview
                                                                           Other Quantitative Biology



       Methodology


                                     Figure 23: Ontology for arXiv generated by Hearst




                                                                            33


===== PDF PAGE 34 =====
                                                                         Risk Management   Statistics
                                                                                                        Molecular Networks
                                                     Main topic classifications



                                                                                                                           Spectral Theory
                                      Combinatorics                                             Algebraic Geometry
                                                                                                             Mathematical Physics
                                                       Quantum Algebra
                                                                          General Economics

                                                                                                                                     Neurons and Cognition

                                                                                        Computational Finance



                                       Cell Behavior
                  Other Quantitative Biology

                                                           Biomolecules
                                                                                                                                       Pricing of Securities
                                                                                                                      Populations and Evolution          Genomics
            Subcellular Processes
                                        Other Statistics
                                                           General Mathematics
                      Optimization and Control
         Information Theory                                                                                                     Quantitative Methods        Statistical Finance
                                                                                                                Mathematical Finance
                                                                                                                                               Symplectic Geometry
                                                  Numerical Analysis

                   Tissues and Organs
Trading and Market Microstructure                                                Machine Learning
                                                                                                                                                      Classical Analysis and ODEs
                                    Methodology
                                                                                                                                       General Finance
                                                                                                                      Probability
           Metric Geometry                                                                                                                                  Operator Algebras

                                                  Mathematics
                                                             Category Theory                                                         Quantitative Finance
                             Statistics Theory
                                                                                                                                                       Number Theory
            Portfolio Management
                                                                                                                        Geometric Topology
                                                                                                           Rings and Algebras

                                                                                                                                               Representation Theory
                                                      Differential Geometry
                                     K-Theory and Homology
                     Computation
                                                                                                                         Analysis of PDEs
                           Quantitative Biology                                                                                       Algebraic Topology
                                        History and Overview




                                                                                  General Topology            Logic           Dynamical Systems

                                                 Group Theory

                                                            Functional Analysis
                                                                          Complex Variables                      Applications

                                                                                       Commutative Algebra


                                         Figure 24: Ontology for arXiv generated by REBEL




                      Artificial Intelligence
                                                                                                                                                     Functional Analysis

                                                               Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning
                                                              Health and Medicine
                                          Computer Science
                                                                                                                                            Analysis


                                                                                                Physics

                                      Machine Learning
                                                     Main topic classifications
                                                                                                                                             Optimization

                                                                                                                        Mathematics

                     Deep Learning
                              Machine Learning and AI
                                             Machine Learning and Artificial Intelligence                                           Probability Theory and Statistics
Neural Networks                                        Communications Technology

                                                                                                         Theoretical Mathematics
                                                                                                                       Applied Mathematics

                                        Figure 25: Ontology for arXiv generated by Zero-shot




                                                                                     34


===== PDF PAGE 35 =====
                  Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning                          Probability Theory and Statistics

                                                                 Science               Optimization
           Machine Learning and AI                                                                               Analysis
     Deep Learning

                                  Computer Science
                                                                                                MathematicsFunctional Analysis
                                                         Main topic classifications
            Machine Learning

                       Artificial Intelligence                                                  Mathematical Analysis
                                                                            Mathematical Physics
Neural Networks
                                                                                                Applied Mathematics
                                                                        Physics




                                                              Theoretical Physics                     Electrical Engineering
                                                                                                                           Engineering

                                 Figure 26: Ontology for arXiv generated by One-shot




                                                           Engineering and Technology
                                                                                                       Probability and Statistics


                Machine Learning                                                      Physics
Deep Learning                          Machine Learning and Artificial Intelligence                                    Mathematical Physics



                                                                                                        Mathematics
                                                              Main topic classifications
     Machine Learning and AI Computer Science

                                                                                                                         Applied Mathematics


                                                                  Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning
                                                        Engineering
                                                                                                                 Analysis
                    Artificial Intelligence
                                                     Electrical Engineering and Systems Science

                               Figure 27: Ontology for arXiv generated by Three-shot




                                                                     35


===== PDF PAGE 36 =====
NeurIPS Paper Checklist
    1. Claims
       Question: Do the main claims made in the abstract and introduction accurately reflect the
       paper’s contributions and scope?
       Answer: [Yes]
       Justification: The main claims of this paper are: 1. OLLM is an effective method for building
       ontologies from scratch, and 2. the evaluation metrics we introduce are robust and useful
       for gold standard evaluation of ontologies. We justify the first claim by demonstrating that
       OLLM outperforms our baseline methods on Wikipedia and arXiv according to our metrics.
       We justify the second claim by showing that an existing metric (Literal F1) can score the
       sub-optimal Memorisation solution highly, while our metrics are not subject to this issue.
       Our new metrics also suggest results that align with our qualitative analysis.
       Guidelines:
          • The answer NA means that the abstract and introduction do not include the claims
             made in the paper.
          • The abstract and/or introduction should clearly state the claims made, including the
             contributions made in the paper and important assumptions and limitations. A No or
             NA answer to this question will not be perceived well by the reviewers.
          • The claims made should match theoretical and experimental results, and reflect how
             much the results can be expected to generalize to other settings.
          • It is fine to include aspirational goals as motivation as long as it is clear that these goals
             are not attained by the paper.
    2. Limitations
       Question: Does the paper discuss the limitations of the work performed by the authors?
       Answer: [Yes]
       Justification: We discuss the limitations and the possible resolutions in Section 6. This
       includes the scope of the work, where we only study ontologies with concepts and taxonomic
       relations, the inability to guarantee taxonomic relation transitivity, and the inability to control
       for data leakage from the pretraining stage of the LLM base model.
       Guidelines:
          • The answer NA means that the paper has no limitation while the answer No means that
             the paper has limitations, but those are not discussed in the paper.
          • The authors are encouraged to create a separate "Limitations" section in their paper.
          • The paper should point out any strong assumptions and how robust the results are to
             violations of these assumptions (e.g., independence assumptions, noiseless settings,
             model well-specification, asymptotic approximations only holding locally). The authors
             should reflect on how these assumptions might be violated in practice and what the
             implications would be.
          • The authors should reflect on the scope of the claims made, e.g., if the approach was
             only tested on a few datasets or with a few runs. In general, empirical results often
             depend on implicit assumptions, which should be articulated.
          • The authors should reflect on the factors that influence the performance of the approach.
             For example, a facial recognition algorithm may perform poorly when image resolution
             is low or images are taken in low lighting. Or a speech-to-text system might not be
             used reliably to provide closed captions for online lectures because it fails to handle
             technical jargon.
          • The authors should discuss the computational efficiency of the proposed algorithms
             and how they scale with dataset size.
          • If applicable, the authors should discuss possible limitations of their approach to
             address problems of privacy and fairness.
          • While the authors might fear that complete honesty about limitations might be used by
             reviewers as grounds for rejection, a worse outcome might be that reviewers discover
             limitations that aren’t acknowledged in the paper. The authors should use their best


                                                  36


===== PDF PAGE 37 =====
       judgment and recognize that individual actions in favor of transparency play an impor-
       tant role in developing norms that preserve the integrity of the community. Reviewers
       will be specifically instructed to not penalize honesty concerning limitations.
3. Theory Assumptions and Proofs
  Question: For each theoretical result, does the paper provide the full set of assumptions and
  a complete (and correct) proof?
  Answer: [NA]
  Justification: This paper does not include theoretical results.
  Guidelines:
     • The answer NA means that the paper does not include theoretical results.
     • All the theorems, formulas, and proofs in the paper should be numbered and cross-
       referenced.
     • All assumptions should be clearly stated or referenced in the statement of any theorems.
     • The proofs can either appear in the main paper or the supplemental material, but if
       they appear in the supplemental material, the authors are encouraged to provide a short
       proof sketch to provide intuition.
     • Inversely, any informal proof provided in the core of the paper should be complemented
       by formal proofs provided in appendix or supplemental material.
     • Theorems and Lemmas that the proof relies upon should be properly referenced.
4. Experimental Result Reproducibility
  Question: Does the paper fully disclose all the information needed to reproduce the main ex-
  perimental results of the paper to the extent that it affects the main claims and/or conclusions
  of the paper (regardless of whether the code and data are provided or not)?
  Answer: [Yes]
  Justification: We describe the data collection procedure in Section 4.1 and the full experiment
  details in Appendix A.1. We also include the code and dataset in the supplementary material.
  Guidelines:
     • The answer NA means that the paper does not include experiments.
     • If the paper includes experiments, a No answer to this question will not be perceived
       well by the reviewers: Making the paper reproducible is important, regardless of
       whether the code and data are provided or not.
     • If the contribution is a dataset and/or model, the authors should describe the steps taken
       to make their results reproducible or verifiable.
     • Depending on the contribution, reproducibility can be accomplished in various ways.
       For example, if the contribution is a novel architecture, describing the architecture fully
       might suffice, or if the contribution is a specific model and empirical evaluation, it may
       be necessary to either make it possible for others to replicate the model with the same
       dataset, or provide access to the model. In general. releasing code and data is often
       one good way to accomplish this, but reproducibility can also be provided via detailed
       instructions for how to replicate the results, access to a hosted model (e.g., in the case
       of a large language model), releasing of a model checkpoint, or other means that are
       appropriate to the research performed.
     • While NeurIPS does not require releasing code, the conference does require all submis-
       sions to provide some reasonable avenue for reproducibility, which may depend on the
       nature of the contribution. For example
       (a) If the contribution is primarily a new algorithm, the paper should make it clear how
            to reproduce that algorithm.
       (b) If the contribution is primarily a new model architecture, the paper should describe
            the architecture clearly and fully.
       (c) If the contribution is a new model (e.g., a large language model), then there should
            either be a way to access this model for reproducing the results or a way to reproduce
            the model (e.g., with an open-source dataset or instructions for how to construct
            the dataset).


                                           37


===== PDF PAGE 38 =====
       (d) We recognize that reproducibility may be tricky in some cases, in which case
           authors are welcome to describe the particular way they provide for reproducibility.
           In the case of closed-source models, it may be that access to the model is limited in
           some way (e.g., to registered users), but it should be possible for other researchers
           to have some path to reproducing or verifying the results.
5. Open access to data and code
  Question: Does the paper provide open access to the data and code, with sufficient instruc-
  tions to faithfully reproduce the main experimental results, as described in supplemental
  material?
  Answer: [Yes]
  Justification: The code and data used for this project are provided in the supplementary
  material. The code includes a README which details the steps for reproducing our results.
  Guidelines:
     • The answer NA means that paper does not include experiments requiring code.
     • Please see the NeurIPS code and data submission guidelines (https://nips.cc/
       public/guides/CodeSubmissionPolicy) for more details.
     • While we encourage the release of code and data, we understand that this might not be
       possible, so “No” is an acceptable answer. Papers cannot be rejected simply for not
       including code, unless this is central to the contribution (e.g., for a new open-source
       benchmark).
     • The instructions should contain the exact command and environment needed to run to
       reproduce the results. See the NeurIPS code and data submission guidelines (https:
       //nips.cc/public/guides/CodeSubmissionPolicy) for more details.
     • The authors should provide instructions on data access and preparation, including how
       to access the raw data, preprocessed data, intermediate data, and generated data, etc.
     • The authors should provide scripts to reproduce all experimental results for the new
       proposed method and baselines. If only a subset of experiments are reproducible, they
       should state which ones are omitted from the script and why.
     • At submission time, to preserve anonymity, the authors should release anonymized
       versions (if applicable).
     • Providing as much information as possible in supplemental material (appended to the
       paper) is recommended, but including URLs to data and code is permitted.
6. Experimental Setting/Details
  Question: Does the paper specify all the training and test details (e.g., data splits, hyper-
  parameters, how they were chosen, type of optimizer, etc.) necessary to understand the
  results?
  Answer: [Yes]
  Justification: We give all the experimental details in Appendix A.1.
  Guidelines:
     • The answer NA means that the paper does not include experiments.
     • The experimental setting should be presented in the core of the paper to a level of detail
       that is necessary to appreciate the results and make sense of them.
     • The full details can be provided either with the code, in appendix, or as supplemental
       material.
7. Experiment Statistical Significance
  Question: Does the paper report error bars suitably and correctly defined or other appropriate
  information about the statistical significance of the experiments?
  Answer: [No]
  Justification: We did not perform repeated experiments due to compute constraints, therefore
  there are no error bars.
  Guidelines:


                                           38


===== PDF PAGE 39 =====
       • The answer NA means that the paper does not include experiments.
       • The authors should answer "Yes" if the results are accompanied by error bars, confi-
          dence intervals, or statistical significance tests, at least for the experiments that support
          the main claims of the paper.
       • The factors of variability that the error bars are capturing should be clearly stated (for
          example, train/test split, initialization, random drawing of some parameter, or overall
          run with given experimental conditions).
       • The method for calculating the error bars should be explained (closed form formula,
          call to a library function, bootstrap, etc.)
       • The assumptions made should be given (e.g., Normally distributed errors).
       • It should be clear whether the error bar is the standard deviation or the standard error
          of the mean.
       • It is OK to report 1-sigma error bars, but one should state it. The authors should
          preferably report a 2-sigma error bar than state that they have a 96% CI, if the hypothesis
          of Normality of errors is not verified.
       • For asymmetric distributions, the authors should be careful not to show in tables or
          figures symmetric error bars that would yield results that are out of range (e.g. negative
          error rates).
       • If error bars are reported in tables or plots, The authors should explain in the text how
          they were calculated and reference the corresponding figures or tables in the text.
 8. Experiments Compute Resources
    Question: For each experiment, does the paper provide sufficient information on the com-
    puter resources (type of compute workers, memory, time of execution) needed to reproduce
    the experiments?
    Answer: [Yes]
    Justification: We describe the compute requirements for each experiment in Appendix A.1.
    Guidelines:
       • The answer NA means that the paper does not include experiments.
       • The paper should indicate the type of compute workers CPU or GPU, internal cluster,
          or cloud provider, including relevant memory and storage.
       • The paper should provide the amount of compute required for each of the individual
          experimental runs as well as estimate the total compute.
       • The paper should disclose whether the full research project required more compute
          than the experiments reported in the paper (e.g., preliminary or failed experiments that
          didn’t make it into the paper).
 9. Code Of Ethics
    Question: Does the research conducted in the paper conform, in every respect, with the
    NeurIPS Code of Ethics https://neurips.cc/public/EthicsGuidelines?
    Answer: [Yes]
    Justification: This paper does not involve human subjects and does not use data that is
    not already in the public domain. We clearly describe our data collection procedure in
    Section 4.1. Our method is highly specialised in building ontologies and solving related
    tasks, thus having minimal societal impact or any potentially harmful consequences.
    Guidelines:
       • The answer NA means that the authors have not reviewed the NeurIPS Code of Ethics.
       • If the authors answer No, they should explain the special circumstances that require a
          deviation from the Code of Ethics.
       • The authors should make sure to preserve anonymity (e.g., if there is a special consid-
          eration due to laws or regulations in their jurisdiction).
10. Broader Impacts
    Question: Does the paper discuss both potential positive societal impacts and negative
    societal impacts of the work performed?


                                               39


===== PDF PAGE 40 =====
    Answer: [NA]
    Justification: Our method is highly specialised in building ontologies and solving related
    tasks only. We do not expect our work to have a wider impact than improving the quality of
    existing or new ontologies.
    Guidelines:
       • The answer NA means that there is no societal impact of the work performed.
       • If the authors answer NA or No, they should explain why their work has no societal
         impact or why the paper does not address societal impact.
       • Examples of negative societal impacts include potential malicious or unintended uses
         (e.g., disinformation, generating fake profiles, surveillance), fairness considerations
         (e.g., deployment of technologies that could make decisions that unfairly impact specific
         groups), privacy considerations, and security considerations.
       • The conference expects that many papers will be foundational research and not tied
         to particular applications, let alone deployments. However, if there is a direct path to
         any negative applications, the authors should point it out. For example, it is legitimate
         to point out that an improvement in the quality of generative models could be used to
         generate deepfakes for disinformation. On the other hand, it is not needed to point out
         that a generic algorithm for optimizing neural networks could enable people to train
         models that generate Deepfakes faster.
       • The authors should consider possible harms that could arise when the technology is
         being used as intended and functioning correctly, harms that could arise when the
         technology is being used as intended but gives incorrect results, and harms following
         from (intentional or unintentional) misuse of the technology.
       • If there are negative societal impacts, the authors could also discuss possible mitigation
         strategies (e.g., gated release of models, providing defenses in addition to attacks,
         mechanisms for monitoring misuse, mechanisms to monitor how a system learns from
         feedback over time, improving the efficiency and accessibility of ML).
11. Safeguards
    Question: Does the paper describe safeguards that have been put in place for responsible
    release of data or models that have a high risk for misuse (e.g., pretrained language models,
    image generators, or scraped datasets)?
    Answer: [NA]
    Justification: This paper poses no such risks. The trained model is specific to building
    ontologies only.
    Guidelines:
       • The answer NA means that the paper poses no such risks.
       • Released models that have a high risk for misuse or dual-use should be released with
         necessary safeguards to allow for controlled use of the model, for example by requiring
         that users adhere to usage guidelines or restrictions to access the model or implementing
         safety filters.
       • Datasets that have been scraped from the Internet could pose safety risks. The authors
         should describe how they avoided releasing unsafe images.
       • We recognize that providing effective safeguards is challenging, and many papers do
         not require this, but we encourage authors to take this into account and make a best
         faith effort.
12. Licenses for existing assets
    Question: Are the creators or original owners of assets (e.g., code, data, models), used in
    the paper, properly credited and are the license and terms of use explicitly mentioned and
    properly respected?
    Answer: [Yes]
    Justification: The two datasets collected in this project use data from Wikipedia and arXiv,
    which are in the public domain under the CC BY-SA 4.0 and CC0 1.0 Deed licenses
    respectively. The REBEL-large model is available under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license.


                                             40


===== PDF PAGE 41 =====
    Guidelines:
       • The answer NA means that the paper does not use existing assets.
       • The authors should cite the original paper that produced the code package or dataset.
       • The authors should state which version of the asset is used and, if possible, include a
          URL.
       • The name of the license (e.g., CC-BY 4.0) should be included for each asset.
       • For scraped data from a particular source (e.g., website), the copyright and terms of
          service of that source should be provided.
       • If assets are released, the license, copyright information, and terms of use in the
          package should be provided. For popular datasets, paperswithcode.com/datasets
          has curated licenses for some datasets. Their licensing guide can help determine the
          license of a dataset.
       • For existing datasets that are re-packaged, both the original license and the license of
          the derived asset (if it has changed) should be provided.
       • If this information is not available online, the authors are encouraged to reach out to
          the asset’s creators.
13. New Assets
    Question: Are new assets introduced in the paper well documented and is the documentation
    provided alongside the assets?
    Answer: [Yes]
    Justification: We release the dataset and code for this paper. The data collection procedure is
    clearly described in Section 4.1. The training procedure is clearly described in Appendix A.1.
    Guidelines:
       • The answer NA means that the paper does not release new assets.
       • Researchers should communicate the details of the dataset/code/model as part of their
          submissions via structured templates. This includes details about training, license,
          limitations, etc.
       • The paper should discuss whether and how consent was obtained from people whose
          asset is used.
       • At submission time, remember to anonymize your assets (if applicable). You can either
          create an anonymized URL or include an anonymized zip file.
14. Crowdsourcing and Research with Human Subjects
    Question: For crowdsourcing experiments and research with human subjects, does the paper
    include the full text of instructions given to participants and screenshots, if applicable, as
    well as details about compensation (if any)?
    Answer: [NA]
    Justification: This paper does not involve crowdsourcing nor research with human subjects.
    Guidelines:
       • The answer NA means that the paper does not involve crowdsourcing nor research with
          human subjects.
       • Including this information in the supplemental material is fine, but if the main contribu-
          tion of the paper involves human subjects, then as much detail as possible should be
          included in the main paper.
       • According to the NeurIPS Code of Ethics, workers involved in data collection, curation,
          or other labor should be paid at least the minimum wage in the country of the data
          collector.
15. Institutional Review Board (IRB) Approvals or Equivalent for Research with Human
    Subjects
    Question: Does the paper describe potential risks incurred by study participants, whether
    such risks were disclosed to the subjects, and whether Institutional Review Board (IRB)
    approvals (or an equivalent approval/review based on the requirements of your country or
    institution) were obtained?


                                             41


===== PDF PAGE 42 =====
Answer: [NA]
Justification: This paper does not involve crowdsourcing nor research with human subjects.
Guidelines:
   • The answer NA means that the paper does not involve crowdsourcing nor research with
      human subjects.
   • Depending on the country in which research is conducted, IRB approval (or equivalent)
      may be required for any human subjects research. If you obtained IRB approval, you
      should clearly state this in the paper.
   • We recognize that the procedures for this may vary significantly between institutions
      and locations, and we expect authors to adhere to the NeurIPS Code of Ethics and the
      guidelines for their institution.
   • For initial submissions, do not include any information that would break anonymity (if
      applicable), such as the institution conducting the review.




                                       42
