===== PDF PAGE 1 =====
                                               iText2KG: Incremental Knowledge Graphs
                                               Construction Using Large Language Models

                                                     Yassir LAIRGI1,2[0000−0002−7284−5489] , Ludovic
                                                         1[0000−0002−1590−9546]
                                              MONCLA                   , Rémy CAZABET1[0000−0002−9429−3865] ,
                                                     Khalid BENABDESLEM1 , and Pierre CLÉAU2
                                         1
                                              INSA Lyon, CNRS, Universite Claude Bernard Lyon 1, LIRIS, UMR5205, 69621




arXiv:2409.03284v1 [cs.AI] 5 Sep 2024
                                                          Villeurbanne {ludovic.moncla, remy.cazabet,
                                                               khalid.benabdeslem}@liris.cnrs.fr
                                                 2
                                                   GAUC, Lyon France {yassir.lairgi, pierre.cleau}@auvalie.com


                                                 Abstract. Most available data is unstructured, making it challenging to
                                                 access valuable information. Automatically building Knowledge Graphs
                                                 (KGs) is crucial for structuring data and making it accessible, allowing
                                                 users to search for information effectively. KGs also facilitate insights, in-
                                                 ference, and reasoning. Traditional NLP methods, such as named entity
                                                 recognition and relation extraction, are key in information retrieval but
                                                 face limitations, including the use of predefined entity types and the need
                                                 for supervised learning. Current research leverages large language mod-
                                                 els’ capabilities, such as zero- or few-shot learning. However, unresolved
                                                 and semantically duplicated entities and relations still pose challenges,
                                                 leading to inconsistent graphs and requiring extensive post-processing.
                                                 Additionally, most approaches are topic-dependent. In this paper, we pro-
                                                 pose iText2KG3 , a method for incremental, topic-independent KG con-
                                                 struction without post-processing. This plug-and-play, zero-shot method
                                                 is applicable across a wide range of KG construction scenarios and com-
                                                 prises four modules: Document Distiller, Incremental Entity Extractor,
                                                 Incremental Relation Extractor, and Graph Integrator and Visualization.
                                                 Our method demonstrates superior performance compared to baseline
                                                 methods across three scenarios: converting scientific papers to graphs,
                                                 websites to graphs, and CVs to graphs.

                                                 Keywords: Knowledge Graph Construction · Large Language Models ·
                                                 Natural Language Processing.


                                        1      Introduction
                                        In the contemporary era, most data is unstructured, leading to substantial in-
                                        formation loss if not effectively harnessed [3]. This unstructured data lacks a
                                        predefined format, posing significant challenges for traditional data processing
                                        methodologies. Consequently, organizations must employ advanced text under-
                                        standing and information extraction techniques to analyze and extract meaning-
                                        ful insights from this data effectively.
                                        3
                                             The code and the dataset are available at https://github.com/AuvaLab/itext2kg


===== PDF PAGE 2 =====
2      Y. Lairgi et al.

     Text understanding and information extraction are key tasks in Natural Lan-
guage Processing (NLP) for automatically processing data from unstructured
text documents. The rise of Transformer architectures and pre-trained large lan-
guage models (LLMs) opens new perspectives for extracting and structuring
information from vast amounts of natural language texts [5]. One main aspect
deals with Knowledge graphs (KGs) construction. KGs structure representations
of knowledge by capturing relationships between entities and hold considerable
advantages in analyzing text data collections and inferring knowledge from struc-
tured heterogeneous data. For instance, KGs can merge diverse data from mul-
tiple sources, offering a cohesive information perspective. They can also give an
additional level of explainability to the analysis of text corpora.
     Named Entity Recognition, Relation Extraction, and Entity Resolution are
NLP techniques usually utilized to transform unstructured text into structured
data, capturing entities, their connections, and associated attributes [9,10]. How-
ever, these methods encounter several limitations [1,8]. They are frequently re-
stricted to predefined entities and relationships or depend on specific ontologies
and mostly rely on supervised learning methods, necessitating extensive human
annotation.
     To address these challenges, we aim to leverage LLMs in constructing KGs.
Recent advancements in LLMs have shown potential and improved performance
across a various range of NLP tasks, including knowledge graph completion,
ontology refinement, and question answering, offering promising prospects for
KG construction [8]. LLMs also show great ability for few-shot learning, enabling
plug-and-play solutions, and eliminating the necessity for extensive training or
fine-tuning. They can be used to extract knowledge across diverse domains due
to their training in a wide range of information sources [14].
     Consequently, recent research has started utilizing advancements in LLMs,
especially their capabilities in few-shot learning in KGs construction tasks. How-
ever, unresolved and semantically duplicated entities and relations still pose
significant challenges, leading to inconsistent graphs that require extensive post-
processing. These inconsistencies can manifest as redundancies, ambiguities, and
a real difficulty for graph extension. Additionally, many current approaches are
topic-dependent, meaning their effectiveness heavily relies on the specific use
case they are designed to handle. This dependency limits the generalizability of
these methods across different domains, necessitating customized solutions for
each new topic area.
     In this paper, we propose iText2KG, a zero-shot method to construct consis-
tent KGs from raw documents incrementally, using an LLM. It comprises four
modules: 1) Document Distiller reformulates the raw documents, by taking a
schema or a blueprint, into predefined and semantic blocks using LLMs. The
schema operates like a predefined JSON structure, directing the language model
to extract specific textual information associated with particular keys from each
document, 2) iEntities Extractor takes the semantic blocks and not only iden-
tifies unique semantic entities within the semantic blocks but also resolves any
ambiguities, ensuring that each entity is clearly defined and distinguished from


===== PDF PAGE 3 =====
        iText2KG: Incremental Knowledge Graphs Construction Using LLMs          3

others, 3) iRelation Extractor processes the resolved entities along with the se-
mantic blocks to detect the semantically unique relationships. Further details
are in the next sections. The final module employs Neo4j 4 to represent these
relationships and entities in a graph format visually.


2     Related works
LLM-based solutions for building KGs can be categorized according to three
paradigms: ontology-guided, fine-tuning, and zero- or few-shot learning.
     The AttacKG+ method, a fully automatic LLM-based framework for con-
structing attack KGs and capturing the progressive stages of cyber attacks, was
introduced by [13]. The framework consists of four modules: rewriter, parser,
identifier, and summarizer. The rewriter filters out redundant information and
organizes report content into sections to preserve key knowledge, pre-cleans data,
and sequences events chronologically. Guided by an ontology, the parser extracts
threat actions using a triplet model (subject, action, object). The identifier
matches these behavior graphs and rewritten sections to the appropriate for-
mat. Finally, the summarizer provides an overview of the situation and state at
the end of each tactical stage. A theme-specific KG (ThemeKG) was proposed
[2], constructed from a theme-specific corpus using an unsupervised framework
(TKGCon) to address two main issues: limited information granularity and de-
ficiency in timeliness. This approach generates KGs with accurate entities and
relations by leveraging common sense knowledge from Wikipedia and LLMs for
ontology guidance. Their model surpasses GPT-4 in performance due to its con-
sistently precise identification of entities and relations
     Text2KGBench, a benchmark designed to evaluate the capabilities of lan-
guage models to generate KGs from natural language text guided by an on-
tology, was presented by [8]. They define seven evaluation metrics to measure
fact extraction performance, ontology conformance, and hallucinations. A semi-
automatic method for constructing KGs using open-source LLMs was introduced
in recent research [7]. Their pipeline includes formulating competency questions
(CQs) and developing an ontology derived from them. To assess the accuracy of
the generated answers, they devised a judge LLM, which evaluates the content
against ground truth. One major challenge with these proposed methods is their
difficulty in generalizing their applicability to diverse KG construction scenar-
ios due to their ontology dependency. The Wikipedia concept graph is also not
exhaustive, particularly for country-specific concepts. For instance, it may not
adequately cover terms like "French Research Collaboration Tax Credit".
     An LLM was employed for building a KG from unstructured open-source
threat intelligence [4]. This approach involves generating a dataset utilizing the
zero-shot capability of GPT-3.5. Subsequently, this dataset is utilized for fine-
tuning a smaller language model. One major challenge of this method is adapting
it to different KG construction scenarios. Especially, the few-shot methods are
more resource-efficient than the fine-tuned solutions [12].
4
    https://neo4j.com/


===== PDF PAGE 4 =====
 4        Y. Lairgi et al.

     An iterative LLM prompting-based pipeline for automatically generating
 knowledge graphs, which bypasses the need for predefined sets or external on-
 tologies, was proposed by [1]. This pipeline employs a sequence of well-formed
 LLM prompts for each stage, enabling the identification of relevant entities, ex-
 tracting their descriptions and types, and identifying meaningful relationships.
 The authors proposed an approach to entity/relation resolution using semantic
 aggregation and LLM prompting. It starts with semantic aggregation, calculat-
 ing similarity scores for entities and relations based on label similarity, entity
 type similarity, and description similarity using methods like Levenshtein dis-
 tance and cosine similarity with the Universal Sentence Encoder model. The
 entities and relations are aggregated if their scores exceed predefined thresholds.
 Even though the proposed approaches present several advantages, it has certain
 limitations: (1) The entity/relation resolution phase aggregates nodes and rela-
 tions having the same meaning, and then the LLM suggests a representative for
 each cluster based on the cluster elements. This could hinder the precision of
 the graph, especially if "bike" and "motorcycle" need to be separated. Still, the
 model merges them into "vehicle." (2) The latter phase involves post-processing,
 which could be computationally intensive. (3) The post-processing phase assumes
 that entities and relations are extracted. Hence, if entities are not resolved be-
 fore relation extraction, redundant relations from redundant entities could arise,
 worsening the quality of the relation extraction.
     A comprehensive quantitative and qualitative evaluation of LLMs for KG
 construction and reasoning was provided [14], using eight diverse datasets across
 four representative tasks: entity and relation extraction, event extraction, link
 prediction, and question-answering. Key findings reveal that while GPT-4 per-
 forms well in KG construction tasks, it excels even more in reasoning tasks,
 sometimes surpassing fine-tuned models. The paper also proposes AutoKG, a
 multi-agent-based approach that utilizes LLMs and external sources for KG con-
 struction and reasoning.


 3     Incremental Text2KG
 This work aims to develop a plug-and-play solution for constructing KGs from
 documents with resolved entities and relations as output. Adopting a ’zero-shot’
 approach is essential to ensure the solution’s applicability across various KG
 construction scenarios. This approach means that the prompts used to generate
 the KG do not require prior examples or predefined ontologies.

 3.1    Problem Formulation
 A graph can be defined as G = (E, R) where E is the set of nodes and R denotes
 the set of edges [5]. Considering the difficulty in merging similar concepts, we
 defined two constraints for the solution:
(C1) An entity ei ∈ E, the set of entities and a relation rk ∈ R, the set of relations,
     should each describe a semantically unique concept.


===== PDF PAGE 5 =====
         iText2KG: Incremental Knowledge Graphs Construction Using LLMs             5

(C2) The sets of entities and relations should contain semantically unique ele-
     ments. This means each entity and relation within the knowledge graph
     must be distinct and unique, with no duplication or semantic overlaps.

 These constraints can be mathematically formulated as follows.

                            ∀ei , ej ∈ E, i ̸= j ⇒ ei ̸= ej                       (1)
                            ∀rk , rl ∈ R, l ̸= k ⇒ rk ̸= rl                       (2)


 3.2   Proposed method

 We propose the iText2KG approach composed of four modules (see Figure 1):
 Document Distiller, Incremental Entities Extractor, Incremental Relations Ex-
 tractor, and Neo4j Graph Integrator. Each module fulfills a distinct role in con-
 structing the KG. Notably, entity extraction and relation extraction tasks are
 separated following results described in [1] that positively impact the perfor-
 mance. Further details of modules 1 to 3 are as follows, with the fourth module
 serving to visualize the graph.




 Fig. 1. The overall workflow of the iText2KG modules. Module 3, the Incremental Re-
 lations Extractor, operates differently depending on whether global or local document
 entities are provided as context.


===== PDF PAGE 6 =====
6       Y. Lairgi et al.

Module 1 - Document Distiller: This module uses LLMs to rewrite input
documents into semantic blocks, considering a predefined schema or blueprint.
It is important to note that the schema is not an ontology but a blueprint that
biases the LLM towards specific classes while maintaining flexibility in others.
Practically, the schema functions like a predefined JSON, instructing the LLM
to extract particular values (textual information) for specific keys from each
document. Some examples of blueprints are available in the iText2KG Github
repository. For each document, we will obtain a JSON semi-filled with the desired
information if it exists in the document. Then, we aggregate all these semi-filled
JSONs to form the semantic blocks of the documents. We have used Langchain’s
JSON Parser5 to define the schema along with the documents as context. The
main goals of this module are: (a) To improve the signal-to-noise ratio by reduc-
ing noise that may pollute the graph with redundant information. (b) To guide
the graph construction process using the schema, especially for concept keys.
For example, for a scientific article, we could extract the “title” and the “au-
thors” and add relations like “HAS TITLE" and “HAS AUTHORS” in addition
to the semantic information. To ensure the applicability of our solution across
various use cases, the schema is an input that depends on user preferences and
the particularity of the use case. The idea of reformulating raw documents to
enhance the graph construction process has been proven by the following papers
[13,11]. The two papers as mentioned earlier introduced a rewriter module, but
it depends on the article’s specific use case. However, our module is adaptable
to many use cases.


Module 2 – Incremental Entities Extractor: The Incremental Entities
Matcher (iEntities Matcher) iterates over all the Semantic Blocks and ex-
tracts the Global Document Entities. The main algorithm of iEntities Matcher
is presented in Figure 2. Initially, entities are extracted from the first semantic
block (document) d0 using an LLM, forming the global entity set E under the
assumption that these entities are pairwise distinct for this first iteration only.
Considering the constraint (C1), the LLM is prompted to extract entities rep-
resenting one unique concept to avoid semantically mixed entities (prompts are
presented in the iText2KG GitHub repository).
    For subsequent documents d in D, the algorithm extracts local entities Ed .
It then attempts to match these local entities with the global entities in E. If a
local entity ei is found in E, it is added to the matched set Ed,matched . If not,
the algorithm searches for a similar entity in E using a cosine similarity measure
with a predefined threshold. If no match is found, the local entity is added to
Ed,matched ; otherwise, the best matching global entity e′i (based on maximum
similarity) is added. The global entity set E is then updated by unifying it
with Ed,matched . This process is repeated for each document in D, resulting in a
comprehensive global entity set E.
5
    https://python.langchain.com/v0.1/docs/modules/model_io/output_parsers/
    types/json/


===== PDF PAGE 7 =====
       iText2KG: Incremental Knowledge Graphs Construction Using LLMs            7




                   Fig. 2. The algorithm of iEntities Matcher




Module 3 – Incremental Relations Extractor: The Global Document En-
tities E are provided as context along with each Semantic Block to the Incremen-
tal Relations Matcher (iRelations Matcher) to extract the Global Document
Relations. The same approach used for iEntities Matcher applies here. We
have observed different behaviors in relation extraction depending on whether
global or local entities are used as context with the Semantic Block for the LLM.
When global entities are provided as context, the LLM extracts both the rela-
tions directly stated and implied by the Semantic Block, especially for entities
not explicitly present in the Semantic Block. This enriches the graph with poten-
tial information but increases the likelihood of irrelevant relations. Conversely,
when locally matched entities are provided as context, the LLM only extracts the
relations directly stated by the context. This approach reduces the richness of
the graph but also lowers the probability of irrelevant relations. The two versions
of iRelations Matcher are presented in Figure 3. This result will be further
discussed in Section 4.


===== PDF PAGE 8 =====
8        Y. Lairgi et al.




                   Fig. 3. The two versions of iRelations Matcher


Module 4 – Graph Integrator: The Global Document Entities and the
Global Document Relations are fed into Neo4j to construct the knowledge graph.

4     Experiments
We chose GPT-4 in all our experiments due to its performance in KG con-
struction and reasoning capabilities, as demonstrated by [14]. Notably, GPT-4
achieves near fine-tuned state-of-the-art performance, even in zero-shot scenar-
ios. To validate our method, it is essential first to evaluate Module 1 to ensure
the concordance of the extracted information with the schema and the seman-
tics of the input documents. Moreover, evaluating modules 1 and 2 regarding
the extracted triplets and the quality of entity/relation resolution is also impor-
tant. To ensure the applicability of our method across different KG construction
scenarios, we have adopted three use cases: website to KG, scientific article to
KG, and Curriculum Vitae to KG.
    We have adapted the metrics proposed by [13] for Module 1 to our use cases.
Hence, we propose the following metrics:
    – Schema consistency: Evaluate whether the content of the rewritten text
      matches the input schema (the blueprint). For each key presented in the


===== PDF PAGE 9 =====
         iText2KG: Incremental Knowledge Graphs Construction Using LLMs            9

      schema, we define Cs (k) as the number of elements correctly matched to
      the schema related to the key k. Is (k) as the number of elements that were
      added but did not belong to the schema. The consistency score for a key in
      the schema is:

                                          Cs (k) − Is (k)
                                SC(k) =                                          (3)
                                              Ts (k)
      Such as:
      Ts (k): The total elements in the schema corresponding to the key k.
      If Cs (k) < Is (k), SC(k) = 0.
      Hence, the schema consistency score is :
                                         X SC(k)
                                  SC =                                           (4)
                                          card(K)
                                         k∈K

   Where K is the set of keys of the schema.
 – Information consistency: Evaluate whether the rewritten text’s content
   matches the original report’s semantics, categorized as follows: very different
   (<30%), medium (30-60%), largely consistent (60-90%), and fully consistent
   (>90%).

    For the second and third modules, it is important to ensure that the extracted
entities and relations are resolved and that the extracted triplets are relevant to
the input documents. Therefore, we propose the following metrics:

 – Triplet Extraction Precision: Evaluate the consistency of the triplets
   with the corresponding text regardless of the entity/relation resolution pro-
   cess. It is important to note that a relevant triplet is implied and not necessar-
   ily directly stated by the text. We define the precision score as the number of
   extracted relevant triplets divided by the total number of extracted triplets.
 – Entity/Relation Resolution False Discovery Rate: Evaluate the pro-
   portion of unresolved (false positive) entities or relations among the total ex-
   tracted entities or relations. Specifically, we calculate the ratio of unresolved
   entities or relations to the total number of extracted entities or relations.
   This metric provides a clear indication of the reliability of the entity and re-
   lation extraction process by highlighting the proportion of errors (unresolved
   entities/relations) within the total extractions.

4.1     Datasets and Baseline Methods
To evaluate Document Distiller, we have generated 5 CVs using GPT-4, se-
lected 5 company websites, and 5 scientific articles. It is important to note that
we have extracted the textual information from websites, which will serve as
input to our model.
    To evaluate the consistency of triplets extracted by iEntities Extractor
and iRelations Extractor, we used the annotated dataset from [6]. We ob-
served that this dataset is not exhaustive for triplet extraction, leading us to


===== PDF PAGE 10 =====
10        Y. Lairgi et al.

conduct manual checks for triplets not present in the dataset. This manual check
combined with the aforementioned dataset composes the ground truth. To assess
the False Discovery Rate of the entity/relation resolution process, we performed
the KG construction process using different baseline methods.
   We have compared our method against baseline methods including Graph
Construction using OpenAI Function Method6 , Langchain7 , and LlamaIndex8 .

4.2     First Module Evaluation Results
Schema Consistency Table 1 demonstrates that Document Distiller achieves
high schema consistency across various document types. Scientific articles and
CVs exhibit the highest schema consistency scores, indicating the module’s ca-
pability to handle structured information, particularly for documents where the
data is primarily organized using titles. While still achieving a strong score of
0.94, websites present a slightly lower consistency, which may be attributed to
web content’s varied and less structured nature. These results highlight the ro-
bustness and adaptability of Document Distiller in processing and extracting
structured information from diverse document types.


      Table 1. The Schema Consistency Score for the different types of documents.

            Documents             CVs      Scientific Articles Websites
      Schema Consistency Score 0.97 ± 0.09     0.98 ± 0.04     0.94 ± 0.13




Information Consistency Figure 4 illustrates the information consistency
across different types of documents: CVs, scientific articles, and websites. For
CVs, the majority of the information (74.5%) is fully consistent, with 25.5%
being largely consistent and no medium consistency. This indicates that the
rewritten text closely matches the semantics of the original content for CVs.
This is because CVs are primarily written in clear and concise phrases, making
it easier for the LLM to capture the semantics. In the case of scientific articles,
57.1% of the information is fully consistent, and 42.9% is largely consistent,
showing a high degree of accuracy in preserving the original semantics, though
slightly less than CVs. This is predictable, especially since scientific articles are
written in scientific English with more complex phrases. Websites have 56.0%
of information fully consistent, 24.0% largely consistent, and 20.0% medium
consistency. This may be due to the unstructured nature of web content, which
poses a greater challenge for accurate semantic rewriting.
6
  https://github.com/tomasonjo/blogs/blob/master/llm/openaifunction_
  constructing_graph.ipynb
7
  https://python.langchain.com/v0.1/docs/use_cases/graph/constructing/
8
  https://docs.llamaindex.ai/en/stable/examples/property_graph/property_
  graph_basic/


===== PDF PAGE 11 =====
        iText2KG: Incremental Knowledge Graphs Construction Using LLMs              11




Fig. 4. Bar Plot of the Information Consistency Scores for the different types of
Documents


4.3   Second and Third Modules Evaluation Results

Triplet Extraction Table 2 shows different behaviors in relation extraction
depending on whether global or local entities are used as context with the Se-
mantic Block for the LLM. The precision of relevant triplets when global entities
are fed as context is 10% lower than that of relevant triplets when local entities
are fed as context. When global entities are used as context, the LLM extracts
relations explicitly mentioned and implied within the Semantic Block. This re-
sults in a richer graph with more potential information and a higher chance of
irrelevant relations. On the other hand, using locally matched entities as context
leads the LLM to extract only the directly stated relations, resulting in a less
enriched graph but with a lower likelihood of irrelevant relations.


Table 2. Precision scores for relevant triplets across two datasets: music and computer
science. The scores are presented for Global Entities as Context and Local Entities as
Context.

                                         Global Entities Local Entities
         Computer Science Dataset          0.83 ± 0.06    0.94 ± 0.06
             Music Dataset                 0.81 ± 0.05     0.9 ± 0.07




   This presents a trade-off that depends on the use case. We leave it to the
user to decide whether to accept a 10% decrease in precision in exchange for an
enriched graph or to gain 10% precision with a less enriched graph.


===== PDF PAGE 12 =====
12      Y. Lairgi et al.

Entity/Relation Resolution To the best of our knowledge, LlamaIndex con-
structs unconnected sub-graphs with edge-level and node-level textual informa-
tion for retrieval-augmented generation (RAG); hence, we did not evaluate Lla-
maIndex against our method. From Table 3 and Table 4, we conclude that our
method delivers superior results for the entity and relation resolution process
across three different KG construction scenarios: scientific articles to KG, CVs
to KG, and websites to KG. Additionally, the results indicate that when the
number of input documents is small and they are structured with clear, non-
complex phrases, the LLM performs well in entity and relation resolution, as
demonstrated by the CVs to KG process.


Table 3. False Discovery Rates of unresolved entities for entity resolution process
across three KG construction scenarios.

                       OpenAI Function Langchain LlamaIndex Our Method
 Scientific Articles      0.11 ± 0.04  0.14 ± 0.08   -       0.01 ± 0.01
        CVs                    0            0        -            0
     Websites             0.31 ± 0.05  0.29 ± 0.06   -            0




Table 4. False Discovery Rates of unresolved relations for relation resolution process
across three KG construction scenarios.

                       OpenAI Function Langchain LlamaIndex Our Method
 Scientific Articles      0.07 ± 0.01  0.06 ± 0.01   -       0.01 ± 0.01
        CVs                    0            0        -            0
     Websites             0.15 ± 0.01  0.14 ± 0.02   -            0



    Moreover, the False Discovery Rates of unresolved entities and relations for
websites to KG are higher than in the other KG construction scenarios. This is
due to the larger number of documents (chunks) and the unstructured nature
of website textual information. Consequently, without an effective resolution
process, the LLM struggles to map similar entities or relations. Therefore, as
long as the number of documents (chunks) is large and the text is unstructured
with complex language, the entity/relation resolution process becomes crucial
for building consistent KGs.


Threshold Estimation To estimate the threshold for merging entities and re-
lationships based on cosine similarity, a dataset of 1,500 similar entity pairs and
500 relationships, inspired by various domains (e.g., news, scientific articles, HR
practices), was generated using GPT-4 and is available in the iText2KG GitHub
repository. Entities and relationships were vectorized using the pre-trained model


===== PDF PAGE 13 =====
        iText2KG: Incremental Knowledge Graphs Construction Using LLMs           13

text-embedding-3-large9 . The mean and standard deviation of cosine similar-
ity for these datasets were then calculated (Table 5). An upper threshold (e.g.,
0.7) was chosen to ensure high precision, while a lower threshold reduced reso-
lution specificity.


Table 5. Cosine Similarities of the Two Datasets for Entity and Relationship Resolu-
tion.

                   Entities Dataset Relationships Dataset
                      0.6 ± 0.12          0.56 ± 0.1


   To illustrate the results of KG construction, Figure 5 presents a comparison
between baseline methods and iText2KG across three distinct scenarios. The
observations are as follows:
 – The baseline methods reveal the presence of isolated nodes without relations
   in all three KG construction scenarios. This phenomenon may be attributed
   to the simultaneous execution of entity extraction and relations extraction,
   which can induce hallucinatory effects in language models, leading to a "for-
   getting" effect. This observation supports the findings of [1], which suggest
   that separating the processes of entity and relation extraction can enhance
   performance.
 – From the ’Website to KG’ scenario, an increase in the volume of input docu-
   ments is associated with the emergence of noisy nodes within the graph. This
   underscores the critical need for Module 1 to effectively refine and distill the
   input data.
 – The iText2KG method demonstrates improved entity and relation resolution
   across the three KG construction scenarios. According to the data in Table 3
   and Table 4, when input documents are fewer and composed of straight-
   forward, non-complex phrases, the language model shows high efficiency in
   entity and relation resolution, as evidenced in the ’CVs to KG’ process. Con-
   versely, the challenges increase with more complex and voluminous data sets,
   as shown in the ’Website to KG’ scenario.
    Moreover, it is important to highlight the effect of the chunking size of the
input document and the threshold on KG construction. Input documents to
the Document Distiller can be independent documents or chunks. If the chunk
size is smaller, the semantic blocks will capture more specific details from the
documents, and vice versa.


5     Conclusion
In this paper, we introduced iText2KG, an approach for incremental KG con-
struction leveraging the zero-shot capabilities of LLMs. Our methodology ad-
9
    https://platform.openai.com/docs/guides/embeddings/embedding-models


===== PDF PAGE 14 =====
14     Y. Lairgi et al.




Fig. 5. Comparison of KG construction across three scenarios between baseline meth-
ods and our method, iText2KG.


dressed limitations inherent in traditional KG construction processes, which
typically depend on predefined ontologies and extensive supervised training.
   A key advantage of the iText2KG approach is its flexibility, which stems
from the use of a user-defined blueprint that outlines the key components to
extract during KG construction. This allows the method to adapt to a wide
range of scenarios, as there is no universal blueprint for all use cases; instead,
the design varies depending on the specific application. Moreover, The iText2KG
method achieves document-type independence by using a flexible, user-defined
blueprint to guide the extraction process, allowing it to handle both structured
and unstructured texts.
   Empirical evaluations across diverse contexts, such as scientific documents,
web content, and CVs, demonstrated the superior performance of the iText2KG


===== PDF PAGE 15 =====
        iText2KG: Incremental Knowledge Graphs Construction Using LLMs             15

approach compared to established baseline methods. The method achieves en-
hanced schema consistency and high precision in entity and relation extraction,
effectively mitigating issues related to semantic duplication and unresolved en-
tities, which are prevalent in traditional methodologies.
    Future research will focus on enhancing metrics such as cosine similarity
for advanced entity and relation matching, eliminating the necessity to define a
threshold as a hyperparameter, and integrating the entity type as a parameter
of the matching process.

References
 1. Carta, S., Giuliani, A., Piano, L., Podda, A.S., Pompianu, L., Tiddia, S.G.: Iter-
    ative zero-shot LLM prompting for knowledge graph construction. arXiv preprint
    arXiv:2307.01128 (2023)
 2. Ding, L., Zhou, S., Xiao, J., Han, J.: Automated construction of theme-specific
    knowledge graphs. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.19146 (2024)
 3. Eberendu, A.C., et al.: Unstructured data: an overview of the data of big data.
    International Journal of Computer Trends and Technology 38(1), 46–50 (2016)
 4. Hu, Y., Zou, F., Han, J., Sun, X., Wang, Y.: LLM-Tikg: Threat intelligence knowl-
    edge graph construction utilizing large language model. Available at SSRN 4671345
    (2023)
 5. Jin, B., Liu, G., Han, C., Jiang, M., Ji, H., Han, J.: Large language models on
    graphs: A comprehensive survey. arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.02783 (2023)
 6. Kabal, O., Harazallah, M., Guillet, F., Ichise, R.: Enhancing domain-independent
    knowledge graph construction through OpenIE cleaning and llms validation (G-
    T2KG). In: 28th International Conference on Knowledge-Based and Intelligent
    Information & Engineering Systems (KES 2024) (2024), to appear
 7. Kommineni, V.K., König-Ries, B., Samuel, S.: From human experts to machines:
    An LLM supported approach to ontology and knowledge graph construction. arXiv
    preprint arXiv:2403.08345 (2024)
 8. Mihindukulasooriya, N., Tiwari, S., Enguix, C.F., Lata, K.: Text2kgbench: A
    benchmark for ontology-driven knowledge graph generation from text. In: Interna-
    tional Semantic Web Conference. pp. 247–265. Springer (2023)
 9. Nasar, Z., Jaffry, S.W., Malik, M.K.: Named entity recognition and relation ex-
    traction: State-of-the-art. ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR) 54(1), 1–39 (2021)
10. Singh, S.: Natural language processing for information extraction. arXiv preprint
    arXiv:1807.02383 (2018)
11. Sun, Z., Ting, Y.S., Liang, Y., Duan, N., Huang, S., Cai, Z.: Knowledge graph in
    astronomical research with large language models: Quantifying driving forces in
    interdisciplinary scientific discovery. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.01391 (2024)
12. Wornow, M., Lozano, A., Dash, D., Jindal, J., Mahaffey, K.W., Shah, N.H.: Zero-
    shot clinical trial patient matching with LLMs. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.05125
    (2024)
13. Zhang, Y., Du, T., Ma, Y., Wang, X., Xie, Y., Yang, G., Lu, Y., Chang, E.C.:
    AttacKG+: Boosting attack knowledge graph construction with large language
    models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.04753 (2024)
14. Zhu, Y., Wang, X., Chen, J., Qiao, S., Ou, Y., Yao, Y., Deng, S., Chen, H., Zhang,
    N.: LLMs for knowledge graph construction and reasoning: Recent capabilities and
    future opportunities. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.13168 (2023)
