===== PDF PAGE 1 =====
     Fast and Exact Rule Mining with AMIE 3

           Jonathan Lajus1 , Luis Galárraga2 , and Fabian Suchanek1
                 1
                     Télécom Paris, Institut Polytechnique de Paris
                                    2
                                       INRIA Rennes



      Abstract. Given a knowledge base (KB), rule mining finds rules such
      as “If two people are married, then they live (most likely) in the same
      place”. Due to the exponential search space, rule mining approaches still
      have difficulties to scale to today’s large KBs. In this paper, we present
      AMIE 3, a system that employs a number of sophisticated pruning strate-
      gies and optimizations. This allows the system to mine rules on large KBs
      in a matter of minutes. Most importantly, we do not have to resort to
      approximations or sampling, but are able to compute the exact confi-
      dence and support of each rule. Our experiments on DBpedia, YAGO,
      and Wikidata show that AMIE 3 beats the state of the art by a factor
      of more than 15 in terms of runtime.


1   Introduction
Recent years have seen the rise of large knowledge bases (KBs) such as Wiki-
data, YAGO, DBpedia, and many others. These are large collections of knowl-
edge about the real world in the form of entities (such as organizations, movies,
people, and locations) and relations between them (such as wasBornIn, actesIn,
etc.). Today’s KBs contain millions of entities and facts about them. They find
applications in Web search, text analysis, and chat bots.
    Rule mining is the task of automatically finding logical rules in a given KB.
For example, a rule mining approach can find that “If X and Y are married, and
X lives in Z, then Y also lives in Z”. Such rules usually come with confidence
scores that express to what degree a rule holds. The rules can serve several
purposes: First, they serve to complete the KB. If we do not know the place of
residence of a person, we can propose that the person lives where their spouse
lives. Second, they can serve to debug the KB. If the spouse of someone lives
in a different city, then this can indicate a problem. Finally, rules are useful in
downstream applications such as fact prediction [5, 12, 14, 18], data and ontology
alignment [7, 10], fact checking [2], and error detection [1].
    The difficulty in finding such rules lies in the exponential size of the search
space: every relation can potentially be combined with every other relation in
a rule. This is why early approaches (such as AMIE [8]) were unable to run on
large KBs such as Wikidata in less than a day. Since then, several approaches
have resorted to sampling or approximate confidence calculations [9, 19, 15, 4].
The more the approach samples, the faster it becomes, but the less accurate
the results will be. Another common technique [15, 13, 19, 16] (from standard


===== PDF PAGE 2 =====
2        Lajus et al.

inductive logic programming) is to mine not all rules, but only enough rules to
cover the positive examples. This, likewise, speeds up the computation, but does
not mine all rules that hold in the KB.
    In this paper, we present AMIE 3, a successor of AMIE [8] and AMIE+ [9].
Our system employs a number of sophisticated strategies to speed up rule mining:
pruning strategies, parallelization, and a lazy computation of confidence scores.
This allows our system to scale effortlessly to large KBs. At the same time,
the system still computes the exact confidence and support values for each rule,
without resorting to approximations. Furthermore, unlike her predecessor [9] and
other systems, AMIE 3 exhaustively computes all rules that hold in the KB for
a given confidence and support threshold.
    Our experiments show that AMIE 3 beats the state of the art by a factor of
15 in terms of runtime. We believe that the techniques that we have discovered
can be of use for other systems as well —no matter whether they compute the
exhaustive set of rules or not.


2     Related Work

First Generation Rule Mining. Inductive Logic Programming (ILP) is the
task of learning rules from positive and negative examples. The first of these sys-
tems [11, 13, 16] appeared before the rise of large KBs. Hence, they are generally
unsuitable for today’s KBs for two reasons: (i) they were not designed to scale to
millions of facts, and (ii) they do not account for the Open World Assumption
(OWA) made by current KBs. For example, FOIL [16] (as well as its optimized
successor [19]) cannot be applied directly to KBs because it assumes the user can
provide explicit counter-examples for the rules. Alas, KBs do not store negative
statements. In contrast, WARMR [11] generates negative evidence by assuming
the KB is complete, i.e., by making a closed world assumption (CWA), whereas
[13] uses a positives-only learning function that generates negative evidence from
random facts (a similar, but more systematic mechanism is proposed in [15]).
It was shown [8] that these strategies work less well on KBs than the partial
completeness assumption (PCA), which was explicitly designed for KBs.
Second Generation Rule Mining. AMIE (and its successor AMIE+) [8,
9] was the first approach to explicitly target large KBs. While AMIE+ is at
least 3 orders of magnitude faster than the first-generation systems, it can still
take hours, even days, to find rules in very large KBs such as Wikidata. On
these grounds, more recent approaches [3, 4, 15] have proposed new strategies
(parallelism, approximations, etc.) to speed up rule mining on the largest KBs.
The Ontological Pathfinding method (OP) [3, 4] resorts to a highly concurrent
architecture based on Spark3 to calculate the support and the confidence of a set
of candidate rules. The candidates are computed by enumerating all conjunctions
of atoms that are allowed by the schema. Like AMIE, OP calculates the exact
scores of the rules and supports both the CWA and the PCA for the generation
3
    https://spark.apache.org


===== PDF PAGE 3 =====
                                       Fast and Exact Rule Mining with AMIE 3      3

of counter-evidence. At the same time, the system supports only path rules of
up to 3 atoms. Other types of rules require the user to implement a new mining
procedure. We will see in our experiments that AMIE 3 is both more general
and faster than OP.
    RudiK [15] is a recent rule mining method that applies the PCA to generate
explicit counter-examples that are semantically related. For example, when gen-
erating counter-facts for the relation hasChild and a given person x, RudiK will
sample among the non-children of x who are children of someone else (x0 6= x).
Rudik’s strategy is to find all rules that are necessary to predict the positive
examples, based on a greedy heuristic that at each step adds the most promising
rule (in terms of coverage of the examples) to the output set. Thus, differently
from exhaustive rule mining approaches [3, 8, 9, 11], Rudik aims to find rules
that make good predictions, not all rules above a given confidence threshold.
This non-exhaustivity endows RudiK with comparable performance to AMIE+
and OP. Nevertheless, we show that AMIE 3 outperforms RudiK in terms of
runtime while still being exhaustive.


3     Preliminaries

Knowledge Bases. We assume a set I of entities (such as Paris), a set P
of binary relations (such as locatedIn), and a set L of literal values (strings or
numbers)4 . We model a knowledge base (KB) K as a set of assertions r(s, o),
also called facts, with a subject s ∈ I, a relation r ∈ P and an object o ∈ I ∪ L.
An example of a fact is locatedIn(Paris, France). Whenever K is clear from the
context, we write r(s, o) to mean r(s, o) ∈ K.
Relations & Functions. The inverse of a relation r, denoted r− , is the relation
consisting of all the facts of the form r− (o, s) such that r(s, o) ∈ K. A relation r
is a function in K, if r has at most one object for each subject. Some relations
(e.g., isCitizenOf ) are quasi-functions, i.e. they rarely associate multiple objects
to a given subject. Hence, the notion of functions has been generalized to the
functionality score [17] of a relation r:

                                       |{s : ∃o : r(s, o) ∈ K}|
                            fun(r) =                                              (1)
                                        |{(s, o) : r(s, o) ∈ K}|

The functionality score is always between 0 and 1 (incl.). It is exactly 1 for strict
functions such as hasBirthPlace, it is close to 1 for quasi-functions, and it is
smaller for relations that have many objects (such as actedInMovie).
Atoms and Rules. An atom is an expression of the form r(X, Y ), where r is
a relation and X, Y are either constants or variables. From now on, we denote
variables by lowercase letters, whereas constants (entities) are always capitalized.
An atom is instantiated if at least one of its arguments is a constant, as in
livesIn(x, Berlin). If both arguments are constants, the atom is grounded and it
is tantamount to a fact. We define the operator var (A) so that it returns the
4
    In line with the other works [4, 8, 9, 15], we do not consider blank nodes.


===== PDF PAGE 4 =====
4       Lajus et al.

set of variables of an atom A. A (conjunctive) query is a conjunction of atoms:
B1 ∧ ... ∧ Bn . A substitution σ is a partial mapping from variables to constants.
Substitutions can be straightforwardly extended to atoms and conjunctions. A
result of a query B1 ∧ ... ∧ Bn on a KB K is a substitution σ that (i) maps all
variables and (ii) that entails σ(Bi ) ∈ K ∀i ∈ {1, ..., n}.
     A (Horn) rule is a formula of the form B ⇒ H, where the B is a query of
body atoms B1 , ..., Bn , and H is the head atom. Two atoms A, A0 are connected
if var (A)∩var (A0 ) 6= ∅, i.e., they have common variables. It is common [4, 8, 9,
15] to impose that all atoms in a rule are transitively connected and that rules
are closed. A rule is closed if all variables appear in at least two atoms. A closed
rule is always safe, i.e. all head variables appear also in at least one body atom.
Predictions. Given a rule R = B1 ∧ ... ∧ Bn ⇒ H and a substitution σ, we
call σ(R) an instantiation of R. If σ(Bi ) ∈ K ∀i ∈ {1, ..., n}, we call σ(H) a
prediction of R from K, and we write K ∧ R |= σ(H). If σ(H) ∈ K, we call σ(H)
a true prediction.
     A false prediction of a rule is a prediction of a counter-example of the
rule. There are different approaches to define these counter-examples: Under
the Closed World Assumption (CWA), any assertion that is not in the KB is
considered a counter-example. However, KBs are usually incomplete, and thus
the CWA penalizes rules that predict new facts. Under the Open World As-
sumption (OWA), facts that are not in the KB are not necessarily wrong, and
hence there are no counter-examples. This entails that a rule mining algorithm
will report arbitrary rules as long as these rules make enough true predictions
(such as “All people play the violin”). Therefore, AMIE [8] has proposed the
Partial Completeness Assumption (PCA): If we have r(s, o) in the KB K, and
if fun(r) ≥ fun(r− ), then we assume that all r(s, o’) 6∈ K do not hold in the real
world. If fun(r) < fun(r− ), then the PCA says that all r(s’, o) 6∈ K do not hold in
the real world. These assertions can thus serve as counter-examples. There are a
number of other approaches to generate counter-examples in the literature [18].
Support and Confidence. The support of a rule R in a KB K is the number
of true predictions p (of the form r(X, Y )) that the rule makes in the KB:
                       support(R) = |{p : (K ∧ R |= p) ∧ p ∈ K}|                (2)
The head-coverage is the proportional variant of the support: It is the ratio of
instantiations of the head atom that are predicted by the rule:
                                            support(B ⇒ r(x, y))
                       hc(B ⇒ r(x, y)) =
                                           |{(x, y) : r(x, y) ∈ K}|
The confidence of a rule R in a KB K is the proportion of true predictions out
of the true predictions and false predictions:
                                               support(R)
        confidence(R) =                                                         (3)
                             support(R) + |{p : (K ∧ R |= p) ∧ p ∈ cex(R)}|
Here, cex(R) denotes the set of counter-examples of R. If the counter-examples
are chosen by the PCA, we refer to the confidence as the PCA confidence and
denote it by pca-conf (analogously for the CWA).


===== PDF PAGE 5 =====
                                   Fast and Exact Rule Mining with AMIE 3           5

    In general, the support of the rule quantifies its relevance, whereas the con-
fidence quantifies its accuracy. Rule mining is the task of finding all rules in
a KB that fulfill certain confidence and support thresholds. It is a relaxation
of inductive logic programming (ILP), in the sense that it finds also rules that
predict some limited number of counter-examples (see [18] for a discussion).


4     AMIE 3
In this section, we first recap the original AMIE algorithm [8] (Section 4.1). Then
we present a series of optimizations that give rise to AMIE 3 (Section 4.2). Fi-
nally, we show different quality metrics that AMIE 3 can compute (Section 4.3).

4.1   The AMIE Approach
The AMIE algorithm [8, 9] is a method to mine closed Horn rules on large KBs.
AMIE (Algorithm 1) takes as input a knowledge base K, and thresholds l for
the maximal number of atoms per rule, minHC for the minimum head coverage,
and minC for the minimum PCA confidence. AMIE uses a classical breadth-first
search: Line 1 initializes a queue with all possible rules of size 1, i.e., rules with
an empty body. The search strategy then dequeues a rule R at a time and adds
it to the output list (Line 6) if it meets certain criteria (Line 5), namely, (i) the
rule is closed, (ii) its PCA confidence is higher than minC, and (iii) its PCA
confidence is higher than the confidence of all previously mined rules with the
same head atom as R and a subset of its body atoms. If the rule R has less than
l atoms and its confidence can still be improved (Line 7), AMIE refines it. The
refinement operator refine (Line 8) derives new rules from R by considering all
possible atoms that can be added to the body of the rule, and creating one new
rule for each of them.
    AMIE iterates over all the non-duplicate refinements of rule R and adds those
with enough head coverage (Lines 10-11). The routine finishes when the queue
runs out of rules. The AMIE algorithm has been implemented in Java with
multi-threading. By default, AMIE sets minHC=0.01, minC=0.1, and l = 3.
AMIE+ [9] optimized this algorithm by a number of pruning strategies, but did
not change the main procedure.

4.2   AMIE 3
We now present the optimizations of Algorithm 1 that constitute AMIE 3, the
successor of AMIE+.

Existential Variable Detection. In order to decide whether to output a rule,
AMIE has to compute its confidence (Lines 5 and 7 of Algorithm 1), i.e., it has
to evaluate Equation 3. If the PCA confidence is used, this equation becomes:
                                            support(B ⇒ r(x, y))
             pca-conf(B ⇒ r(x, y)) =                                        .     (4)
                                         |{(x, y) : ∃y 0 : B ∧ r(x, y 0 )}|


===== PDF PAGE 6 =====
6           Lajus et al.


    Algorithm 1: AMIE
      Input: a KB: K, maximum rule length: l, head coverage threshold: minHC ,
               confidence threshold: minC
      Output: set of Horn rules: rules
    1 q = [> ⇒ r1 (x, y), > ⇒ r2 (x, y) . . . > ⇒ rm (x, y)]
    2 rules = hi
    3 while |q| > 0 do
    4     R = q.dequeue()
    5     if closed (R) ∧ pca-conf(R) ≥ minC ∧ betterThanParents(R, rules) then
    6         rules.add (r)
    7      if length(R) < l ∧ pca-conf(Rc ) < 1.0 then
    8           for each rule Rc ∈ refine(R) do
    9               if hc(Rc ) ≥ minHC ∧ Rc ∈/ q then
10                      q.enqueue(rc )

11      return rules


This is for the case where fun(r) ≥ fun(r− ). If fun(r) < fun(r− ), the denominator
becomes |{(x, y) : ∃x0 : B ∧ r(x0 , y)}|. To evaluate this denominator, AMIE
first finds every possible value of x. This is the purpose of Algorithm 2: We
find the most restrictive atom in the query, i.e., the atom A∗ with the relation
with the least number of facts. If x appears in this atom, we select the possible
instantiation of x in the atom for which the rest of the query is satisfiable (Lines 3
and 4). Otherwise, we recursively find the values of x for each instantiation of this
most restrictive atom and add them to the result set X . Once AMIE has found
the set of possible values for x with Algorithm 2, it determines, for each value
of x, the possible values of y —again by Algorithm 2. This is necessary because
we cannot keep in memory all values of y encountered when we computed the
values of x, because this would lead to a quadratic memory consumption.
    This method can be improved as follows: Assume that our rule is simply
r1 (x, z) ∧ r2 (z, y) ⇒ rh (x, y). Then AMIE will compute the number of distinct
pairs (x, y) for the following query (the denominator of Equation 4):

                               r1 (x, z) ∧ r2 (z, y) ∧ rh (x, y 0 )

AMIE will use Algorithm 2 to select the possible values of x. Assume that the
most restrictive atom is r2 (z, y). Then AMIE will use all possible instantiations
σ : {z ← Z, y ← Y } of this atom, and find the possible values of x for the
following query (Lines 5 and 6 of Algorithm 2):

                              r1 (x, Z) ∧ r2 (Z, Y ) ∧ rh (x, y 0 )               (5)

However, we do not have to try out all possible values of y, because for a fixed
instantiation z ← Z all assignments y ← Y lead to the same value for x. Rather,
y can be treated as an existential variable: once there is a single Y with r2 (Z, Y ),
we do not need to try out the others. Thus, we can improve Algorithm 2 as


===== PDF PAGE 7 =====
                                    Fast and Exact Rule Mining with AMIE 3         7


 Algorithm 2: DistinctValues
   Input: variable x, query q = A1 ∧ ... ∧ An , KB K,
   Output: set of values X
 1 X := ∅
     ∗
 2 A := argminA (|{(x, y) : A = r(x, y), A ∈ q}|)
                    ∗
 3 if x appears in A then
 4     return {x : x ∈ σ(A∗ ) ∧ σ(q \ A∗ ) is satisfiable}
 5 for each σ : σ(A∗ ) ∈ K do
 6     X := X ∪ DistinctValues(x, σ(q \ A∗ ), K)
 7   return X


follows: If a variable y of A∗ = r(x, y) does not appear elsewhere in q, then
Line 5 iterates only over the possible values of x in A∗ .
Lazy Evaluation. The calculation of the denominator of Equation 4 can be
computationally expensive, most notably for “bad” rules such as:

                R : directed (x, z) ∧ hasActor (z, y) ⇒ marriedTo(x, y).         (6)

In such cases, AMIE spends a lot of time computing the exact confidence, only to
find that the rule will be pruned away by the confidence threshold. This can be
improved as follows: Instead of computing first the set of values for x, and then
for each value of x the possible values of y, we compute for each value of x directly
the possible values of y —and only then consider the next value of x. Following
the principle “If you know something is bad, do not spend time to figure out how
bad exactly it is”, we stop this computation as soon as the set size reaches the
value support(R) × minC −1 . If this occurs, we know that pca-conf(R) < minC ,
and hence the rule will be pruned in Line 5 of Algorithm 1.
Variable Order. To compute the PCA confidence (Equation 4), we have to
count the instantiations of pairs of variables x, y. AMIE counts these asymmet-
rically: It finds the values of x and then, for each value of x, the values of y. We
could as well choose to start with y instead. The number of pairs is the same,
but we found that the choice impacts the runtime: Once one variable is fixed,
the computation of the other variable happens on a rule that has fewer degrees
of freedom than the original rule, i.e., it has fewer instantiations. Thus, one has
an interest in fixing first the variable that appears in as many selective atoms
as possible. Alas, it is very intricate to determine which variable restricts more
efficiently the set of instantations, because the variables appear in several atoms,
and each instantiation of the first variable may entail a different number of in-
stantiations of the second variable. Therefore, estimating the exact complexity
is unpractical.
     We use the following heuristic: Between x and y, we choose to start with
the variable that appears in the head atom of the rule in the denominator of
Equation 4. The reason is that this variable appears in at least two atoms al-
ready, whereas the other variable appears only in at least one atom. We show
in our experiments that this method improves the runtime by several orders of
magnitude for some rules.


===== PDF PAGE 8 =====
8         Lajus et al.

Parallel Computation for Overlap Tables. AMIE implements an approx-
imation of Equation 4. This approximation misses only a small percentage of
rules (maximally 5% according to [9]), but speeds up the calculation drastically.
In AMIE 3, this feature can be switched off (to have exact results) or on (to have
faster results). Here, we show how to further speed up this heuristic. The method
finds an efficient approximation of the denominator of Equation 4 for a rule R,
              ˆ
denoted by d(R).                              ˆ
                    AMIE will compute first d(R),   and then discard the rule al-
together if the approximated PCA confidence, support(R) × d(R)  ˆ −1 , is smaller
than the user threshold minC. For a rule R = r1 (x, z) ∧ r2 (z, y) ⇒ rh (x, y), the
approximation ˆ  d(R) is computed as:

                         ˆ       ov (rh , r1 ) · ov (r1− , r2 ) · fun(r2− )
                         d(R) :=                                            .
                                  fun(r1 ) · |dom(r1− )| · fun(r2 )

Here, fun(r) is the functionality score of r; dom(r) = {s : r(s, o)} is the domain
of r, i.e., the set of distinct subject values of r; and ov (r, r0 ) = dom(r) ∩ dom(r0 )
is the overlap between the domains of r and r0 . The approximation ˆ      d(R) uses the
join structure of the query in combination with the functionality scores and the
overlaps to estimate the total number of examples (both positive and negative)
of a rule. The expressions fun(r), dom(r), and ov (r, r0 ) are pre-computed for
all relations. This pre-calculation can be significant for large KBs with many
predicates. In our experiments with DBpedia, e.g., precomputing ov takes twice
as much time as the mining. In AMIE 3, we exploit the fact that this task is easy
parallelizable, and start as many threads as possible in parallel, each treating
one pair of relations. This reduces the precomputation time linearly with the
number of threads (by a factor of 40 in our experiments).
Integer-based in-memory database. AMIE uses an in-memory database to
store the entire KB. Each fact is indexed by subject, by object, by relation, and
by pairs of relation/subject and relation/object. In order to be able to load also
large KBs into memory, AMIE compresses strings into custom-made ByteStrings,
where each character takes only 8 bits. AMIE makes sure that ByteString vari-
ables holding equivalent ByteStrings point to the same physical object (i.e., the
ByteString exists only once). This not just saves space, but also makes hashing
and equality tests trivial. Still, we incur high costs of managing these objects and
the indexes: ByteStrings have to be first created, and then checked for duplicity;
unused ByteStrings have to be garbage-collected; equality checks still require
casting checks; and HashMaps create a large memory overhead. Built-in strings
suffer from the same problems. Therefore, we migrated the in-memory database
to an integer-based system, where entities and relations are mapped to an inte-
ger space and represented by the primitive datatype int. This is in compliance
with most RDF engines and popular serialization formats such as [6]. We use
the fastutil library5 to store the indexes. This avoids the overhead of standard
HashMaps. It also reduces the number of objects that the garbage collector has
to treat, leading to a significant speedup.
5
    http://fastutil.di.unimi.it/


===== PDF PAGE 9 =====
                                     Fast and Exact Rule Mining with AMIE 3       9

4.3     Quality Metrics
AMIE is a generic exhaustive rule miner, and thus its output consists of rules.
These rules can serve as input to other applications, for example, to approaches
that predict facts [5, 15]. Such downstream applications may require different
quality metrics. These can be implemented on top of AMIE, as shown here:
Support & head coverage. Support is a standard quality metric that indi-
   cates the significance of a rule. Due to the anti-monotonicity property, most
   approaches use support to prune the search space of rules. AMIE [8, 9] uses
   by default the head coverage (the relative variant of support) for pruning.
PCA Confidence. By default, AMIE uses the PCA confidence to assess the
   quality of a rule, because it has been shown to rank rules closer to the quality
   of their predictions than classical metrics such as the CWA confidence [8].
CWA confidence. This confidence is used in OP [3, 4]. Many link prediction
   methods are evaluated under the closed world assumption as well [18].
GPRO confidence. The work of [5] noted that the PCA confidence can under-
   estimate the likelihood of a prediction in the presence of non-injective map-
   pings. Therefore, the authors propose a refinement of the PCA confidence,
   the GPRO confidence, which excludes instances coming from non-injective
   mappings in the confidence computation. To judge the quality of a predicted
   fact, the approach needs the GPRO confidence both on the first and second
   variable of the head atom. AMIE is not designed to judge the quality of a
   predicted fact, but can compute the GPRO confidence on both variables.
GRANK confidence. This refinement of the GPRO metric is proposed by [5]
   in order to take into account the number of instances of the variables of the
   rule that are not in the head atom.
These metrics are implemented in AMIE 3 and can be enabled by command line
switches.

5     Experiments
We conducted two series of experiments to evaluate AMIE 3: In the first series
we study the impact of our optimizations on the system’s runtime. In the second
series, we compare AMIE 3 with two scalable state-of-the-art approaches, namely
RudiK [15] and Ontological Pathfinding (OP) [3, 4] (also known as ScaleKB) on
6 different datasets.

5.1     Experimental Setup
Data. We evaluated AMIE 3 and its competitors on YAGO (2 and 2s), DBpedia
(2.0 and 3.8) and a dump of Wikipedia from December 2014. These datasets were
used in evaluations of AMIE+ [9], OP [3] and Rudik [15]. In addition, we used
a recent dump of Wikidata from July 1st, 20196 . Table 1 shows the numbers of
facts, relations, and entities of our experimental datasets.
6
    Selecting only facts between two Wikidata entities, and excluding literals.


===== PDF PAGE 10 =====
10       Lajus et al.


                            Table 1: Experimental datasets
                Dataset                    Facts Relations    Entities
                Yago2                948 358             36    834 750
                Yago2s             4 484 914             37  2 137 469
                DBpedia 2.0        6 601 014          1 595  2 275 327
                DBpedia 3.8       11 024 066            650  3 102 999
                Wikidata 12-2014   8 397 936            430  3 085 248
                Wikidata 07-2019 386 156 557          1 188 57 963 264




      Table 2: Old ByteString database vs. the new integer-based database.
                                            Wall time         Memory used
      Dataset           Loading time
                                        Integer ByteString Integer ByteString
      Yago2                       7s     26.40s      29.69s    6Go        9Go
      Yago2s                     45s   1min 55s    4min 10s   16Go       19Go
      DBpedia 2.0                55s   7min 32s   34min 06s   29Go       32Go
      DBpedia 3.8           1min 20s   7min 49s   52min 10s   40Go       42Go
      Wikidata 2014              59s   5min 44s    6min 01s   27Go       54Go



Configurations. All experiments were run on a Ubuntu 18.04.3 LTS with 40
processing cores (Intel Xeon CPU E5-2660 v3 at 2.60GHz) and 500Go of RAM.
AMIE 3 and RudiK are implemented in Java 1.8. AMIE 3 uses its own in-
memory database to store the KB, whereas RudiK relies on Virtuoso Open
Source 06.01.3127, accessed via a local endpoint. OP was implemented in Scala
2.11.12 and Spark 2.3.4.
    Unless otherwise noted, the experiments were run using the default settings
of AMIE: We used the PCA confidence, computed lazily with a threshold of 0.1,
with all the lossless optimizations (no approximations). The threshold on the
head coverage is 0.01 and the maximal rule length is 3 [8].


5.2    Effect of our optimizations

In-memory database. Table 2 shows the performance with the new integer-
based in-memory database and the old ByteString database. The change reduces
the memory footprint by around 3 GB in most cases, and by 50% in Wikidata.
Moreover, the new database is consistently faster, up to 8-fold for the larger KBs
such as DBpedia 3.8.
Laziness. As explained in Section 4.2, AMIE can invest a lot of time in cal-
culating the PCA confidence of low-confident rules. The lazy evaluation targets
exactly this problem. Table 3 shows that this strategy can reduce the runtime
by a factor of 4. We also show the impact of laziness when the PCA confidence
approximation is switched on. We observe that the parallel calculation of the


===== PDF PAGE 11 =====
                                 Fast and Exact Rule Mining with AMIE 3           11


Table 3: Impact of laziness and of switching on the confidence approximation.
Ov. tables is the time needed to compute the overlap tables.
                     Conf. Approx. off        Confidence Approximation on
   Dataset
                     Non-lazy       Lazy      Non-lazy      Lazy Ov. tables
   Yago2               24.12s       26.40s       24.39s       21.41s       0.2s
   Yago2s            4min 28s    1min 55s     1min 42s     2min 03s        2.4s
   DBpedia 2.0      10min 14s    7min 32s     7min 42s     8min 13s       23.5s
   DBpedia 3.8      14min 50s    7min 49s    11min 07s    10min 18s       15.2s
   Wikidata 2014    19min 27s    5min 44s     5min 45s     4min 36s         12s
   Wikidata 2019       > 48h    16h 43min    17h 06min    16h 31min       41.4s



overlap tables reduces drastically the contribution of this phase to the total run-
time when compared to AMIE+ —where it could take longer than the mining
itself. We also note that the residual impact of the confidence approximation is
small, so that this feature is now dispensable: We can mine rules exhaustively.
Count variable order. To measure the impact of the count variable order, we
ran AMIE 3 (with the lazy evaluation activated) on Yago2s and looked at the
runtimes when counting with the variable that appears in the head atom versus
the runtime when counting with the other variable. For every rule with three
atoms and a support superior to 100, we timed the computation of the PCA
confidence denominator (Equation 4) in each case. The y-axis of Figure 1 shows
the runtime when we first instantiate the variable that occurs in the head atom,
whereas the x-axis shows the runtime when using the other variable.
    We see that every query can be run in under 10 seconds and that most of
the queries would run equally fast independently of the order of the variables.
However, for some rules, instantiating first the variable that does not appear in
the head atom can be worse than the contrary by several orders of magnitude.
Some queries would take hours (days in one case) to compute, even with lazy
evaluation. In Yago2s, these rules happen to be pruned away by the AMIE+
confidence upper bound (a lossless optimization), but this may not be the case
for all KBs. The problematic rules all have bodies of the following shape:
                      
                        hasGender (x, g) ∧ hasGender (y, g)
                        isLocatedIn(x, l) ∧ isLocatedIn(y, l)

Both hasGender and isLocatedIn are very large relations as they apply to any
person and location, respectively. While early pruning of those “hard rules” is
the purpose of the confidence approximations and upper bounds of AMIE+,
these strategies may fail in a few cases, leading to the execution of expensive
queries. Finally, we show the overall impact of the count variable order heuristic
in Table 4. The results suggest that our heuristic generally yields lower runtimes.
Impact of existential variable detection. Last but not least, the on-the-fly
detection of existential variables reduces the number of recursive calls made to
Algorithm 2. Table 5a shows the performances of AMIE 3 with and without this


===== PDF PAGE 12 =====
 12                Lajus et al.


                  10s



                   1s




Head variable
                100ms



                10ms



                 1ms
                        1ms      10ms   100ms      1s      10s   1min   10min   1h    6h   1d 3d
                                                    Other variable

 Fig. 1: Impact of the variable order on Yago2s. Each point is a rule. Cross points:
 pruned by the confidence approximation. Red line: same performance. Dashed
 lines: relative speedup of 10×.


 Table 4: Impact of the variable order: variable that appears in the head atom
 (new AMIE 3 heuristic); variable that does not appear in the head atom; variable
 that appears first in the head atom of the original rule (old AMIE method).
                              Dataset              Head     Non-head Always first
                              Yago2               26.40s       25.64s        23.59s
                              Yago2s            1min 55s     4min 32s      4min 30s
                              DBpedia 2.0       7min 32s    12min 46s      6min 36s
                              DBpedia 3.8       7min 49s    21min 12s      8min 53s
                              Wikidata 2014     5min 44s    36min 09s      9min 50s



 optimization. This optimization is critical for AMIE 3 on most datasets. This is
 less important for DBpedia 2.0 as it contains mostly small relations.
 Metrics. Table 5b shows the impact of different quality metrics on the runtime,
 with iPCA being the PCA with injective mappings. The metrics run slower than
 the PCA confidence, because we cannot use the PCA upper bound optimization.
 The GRank metric, in particular, is very sensitive to the number of facts per
 relation, which explains its performance on Yago2s and DBpedia 3.8. For all
 other metrics, however, the numbers are very reasonable.


 5.3              Comparative Experiments

 In this section, we compare the performance of AMIE 3 with two main state-of-
 the-art algorithms for rule mining in large KBs, RuDiK and OP.


===== PDF PAGE 13 =====
                                   Fast and Exact Rule Mining with AMIE 3         13


                   Table 5: Performance with different features.
    (a) Existential variable detection (ED)       (b) Different metrics (Section 4.3)

 Dataset            AMIE 3        No ED          CWA       iPCA       GPro    GRank
 Yago2                26.40s      24.84s        22.54s    38.42s    37.47s    33.36s
 Yago2s             1min 55s       > 2h       1min 56s 3min 30s 2min 45s       > 2h
 DBpedia 2.0        7min 32s    9min 10s      7min 26s 12min 31s 11min 53s 1h 16min
 DBpedia 3.8        7min 49s       > 2h       6min 49s 15min 22s 23min 31s     > 2h
 Wikidata 2014      5min 44s       > 2h       5min 48s 7min 04s 11min 50s      > 2h




AMIE 3. We ran AMIE 3 in its default settings. In order to compare the im-
provements to previous benchmarks of AMIE, we had AMIE compute the stan-
dard CWA confidence for each rule, in addition to the PCA confidence (except
for Wikidata 2019, where no such previous benchmark exists).
RuDiK. We set the number of positive and negative examples to 500, as ad-
vised on the project’s github page7 . We tried to run the system in parallel for
different head relations. However, the graph generation phase of the algorithm
already runs in parallel and executes a lot of very selective SPARQL queries
in parallel. Hence, the additional parallelization flooded the SPARQL endpoint,
which rejected any new connection at some point. For this reason, we mined the
rules for every possible relation sequentially, using only the original paralleliza-
tion mechanism. RuDiK also benefits from information on the taxonomic types
of the variables. While the built-in method to detect the types of the relations
works out-of-the-box for DBpedia (which has a flat taxonomy), it overgeneralizes
on the other datasets, inverting the expected benefits. Therefore, we ran RuDiK
without the type information on the other datasets.
Ontological Pathfinding. This system first builds a list of candidate rules
(Part 5.1 of [4]). Unfortunately, the implementation of this phase of the al-
gorithm is not publicly available. Hence, we had to generate candidate rules
ourselves. The goal is to create all rules that are “reasonable”, i.e., to avoid
rules with empty joins such as birthPlace(x, y) ∧ hasCapital(x, z). The original
algorithm discards all rules where the domain and range of joining relations do
not match. However, it does not take into account the fact that an entity can be
an instance of multiple classes. Thus, if the domain of actedIn is Actor, and the
domain of directed is Director, the original algorithm would discard any rule that
contains actedIn(x, y) ∧ directed(x, z) —even though it may have a non-empty
support. Hence, we generated all candidate rules where the join between two
connected atoms is not empty in the KB. This produces more candidate rules
than the original algorithm (around 10 times more for Yago2s, i.e., 29762), but
in return OP can potentially mine all rules that the other systems mine.

7
    https://github.com/stefano-ortona/rudik


===== PDF PAGE 14 =====
14     Lajus et al.



Results

It is not easy to compare the performance of OP, AMIE 3, and Rudik, because
the systems serve different purposes, have different prerequisites, and mine dif-
ferent rules. Therefore, we ran all systems in their default configurations, and
discuss the results (Table 6) qualitatively in detail.


Table 6: Performances and output of Ontological Pathfinding (OP), RuDiK and
AMIE 3. *: rules with support ≥ 100 and CWA confidence ≥ 0.1.
       Dataset         System                          Rules      Runtime
                        OP (their candidates)       429 (52*)    18min 50s
                        OP (our candidates)       1 348 (96*)     3h 20min
       Yago2s           RuDiK                              17    37min 30s
                        AMIE 3                             97    1min 50s
                        AMIE 3 (support=1)              1 596      7min 6s
                        OP (our candidates)      7 714 (220*)        > 45h
                        RuDiK                             650    12h 10min
       DBpedia 3.8
                        RuDiK + types                     650    11h 52min
                        AMIE 3                          5 084    7min 52s
                        AMIE 3 (support=1)            132 958    32min 57s
                      OP (our candidates)       15 999 (326*)        > 48h
        Wikidata 2019 RuDiK                             1 145          23h
                      AMIE 3                            8 662   16h 43min



Ontological Pathfinding. We ran OP both with a domain-based candidate
generation (which finds fewer rules) and with our candidate generation. In gen-
eral, OP has the longest running times, but the largest number of rules. This
is inherent to the approach: OP will prune candidate rules using a heuristic [3]
that is similar to the confidence approximation of AMIE+. After this step, it will
compute the support and the exact CWA confidence of any remaining candidate.
However, it offers no way of pruning rules upfront by support and confidence.
This has two effects: First, the vast majority (> 90%) of rules found by OP
have very low confidence (< 10%) or very low support (< 100). Second, most of
the time will be spent computing the confidence of these low-confidence rules,
because the exact confidence is harder to compute for a rule with low confidence.
    To reproduce the result of OP with AMIE, we ran AMIE 3 with a support
threshold of 100 and a CWA confidence threshold of 10%. This reproduces the
rules of OP (and 8 more because AMIE does not use the OP functionality
heuristics) in less than two minutes. If we set our support threshold to 1, and our
minimal CWA confidence to 10−5 , then we mine more rules than OP on Yago2s
(as shown in Table 6) in less time (factor 25×). If we mine rules with AMIE’s
default parameters, we mine rules in less than two minutes (factor 90×).


===== PDF PAGE 15 =====
                                      Fast and Exact Rule Mining with AMIE 3            15

    The large search space is even more critical for OP on DBpedia 3.8 and
Wikidata 2019, as the number of candidate rules grows cubically with the number
of relations. We generated around 9 million candidate rules for DBpedia and
around 114 million candidates for Wikidata. In both cases, OP mined all rules
of size 2 in 1h 20min (≈ 21k candidates) and 14 hours (≈ 100k candidates)
respectively. However, it failed to mine any rule of size 3 in the remaining time.
If we set the minimal support again to 1 and the CWA confidence threshold to
10−5 , AMIE can mine twice as many rules as OP on DBpedia 3.8 in 33 minutes.
RuDiK. For RuDiK, we found that the original parallelization mechanism does
not scale well to 40 cores. The load average of our system, Virtuoso included,
never exceeded 5 cores used. This explains the similar results between our bench-
mark and RuDiK’s original experiments on Yago2s with fewer cores. On DBpe-
dia, we could run the system also with type information —although this did not
impact the runtime significantly. The loss of performance during the execution of
the SPARQL queries is more noticeable due to the multitude of small relations
in DBpedia compared to Yago. In comparison, AMIE was more than 20× faster
on both datasets. This means that, even if RuDiK were to make full use of the
40 cores, and speed up 4-fold, it would still be 5 times slower. AMIE also found
more rules than RuDiK. Among these are all rules that RuDiK found, except
two (which were clearly wrong rules; one had a confidence of 0.001).
    In our experiment, RuDiK mined rules in Wikidata in 23 hours. However,
RuDiK was not able to mine rules for 22 of the relations as Virtuoso was not
able to compute any of the positive or the negative examples RuDiK requires
to operate. This is because RuDiK would timeout any SPARQL query after 20
seconds of execution8 . Virtuoso failed to compute the examples during this time
frame on the 22 relations, which are the largest ones in our Wikidata dataset:
They cover 84% of the facts. Interestingly, RuDiK did also not find rules that
contain these relations in the body (except one, which covered 0.5% of the KB).
    In comparison, AMIE mined 1703 rules with at least one of these rela-
tions, computing the support, confidence and PCA confidence exactly on these
huge relations —in less time. For example, it found the rule inRegion(x, y) ∧
inCountry(y, z) ⇒ inCountry(x, z), which is not considered by RuDiK, but has
a support of over 7 million and a PCA confidence of over 99%.
AMIE 3 outperformed both OP and RuDiK in terms of runtime and the number
of rules. Moreover, it has the advantage of being exact and complete. Then again,
the comparisons have to be seen in context: RuDiK, e.g., is designed to run on
a small machine. For this, it uses a disk-based database and sampling. AMIE,
in contrast, loads all data into memory, and thus has a large memory footprint
(the 500GB were nearly used up for the Wikidata experiment). In return, it
computes all rules exactly and is fast.
8
    Increasing the timeout parameter is not necessarily a good solution for two reasons:
    First, we cannot predict the optimal value so that all queries finish. Second, it would
    increase the runtime of queries succeeding with partial results thanks to Virtuoso’s
    Anytime Query capability. This would largely increase RuDiK’s runtime with no
    guarantee to solve the issue.


===== PDF PAGE 16 =====
16      Lajus et al.

6    Conclusion
We have presented AMIE 3, the newest version of the rule mining system AMIE.
The new system uses a range of optimization and pruning strategies, which
allow scaling to large KBs that were previously beyond reach. In particular,
AMIE 3 can exhaustively mine all rules above given thresholds on support
and confidence, without resorting to sampling or approximations. We hope that
the optimizations and subtleties exposed in this paper can carry over to other
types of databases, and potentially other systems. AMIE is openly available at
https://github.com/lajus/amie/.
Acknowledgements. Partially supported by the grant ANR-16-CE23-0007-01.
References
 1. Ahmadi, N., Huynh, V.P., Meduri, V., Ortona, S., Papotti, P.: Mining Expressive
    Rules in Knowledge Graphs. JDIQ 1(1) (2019)
 2. Ahmadi, N., Lee, J., Papotti, P., Saeed, M.: Explainable Fact Checking with Proba-
    bilistic Answer Set Programming. In: Conference for Truth and Trust online (2019)
 3. Chen, Y., Goldberg, S., Wang, D.Z., Johri, S.S.: Ontological Pathfinding. In: SIG-
    MOD (2016)
 4. Chen, Y., Wang, D.Z., Goldberg, S.: ScaLeKB: Scalable Learning and Inference
    over Large Knowledge Bases. VLDB Journal 25(6) (2016)
 5. Ebisu, T., Ichise, R.: Graph Pattern Entity Ranking Model for Knowledge Graph
    Completion. In: NAACL-HLT (2019)
 6. Fernández, J.D., Martı́nez-Prieto, M.A., Gutiérrez, C., Polleres, A., Arias, M.:
    Binary RDF Representation (HDT). Web Semantics 19 (2013)
 7. Galárraga, L., Heitz, G., Murphy, K., Suchanek, F.: Canonicalizing Open Knowl-
    edge Bases. In: CIKM (2014)
 8. Galárraga, L., Teflioudi, C., Hose, K., Suchanek, F.: AMIE: Association Rule Min-
    ing Under Incomplete Evidence in Ontological Knowledge Bases. In: WWW (2013)
 9. Galárraga, L., Teflioudi, C., Hose, K., Suchanek, F.M.: Fast Rule Mining in Onto-
    logical Knowledge Bases with AMIE+. VLDB Journal 24(6) (2015)
10. Galárraga, L.A., Preda, N., Suchanek, F.M.: Mining rules to align knowledge bases.
    In: AKBC (2013)
11. Goethals, B., Van den Bussche, J.: Relational Association Rules: Getting
    WARMER. In: Pattern Detection and Discovery, vol. 2447 (2002)
12. Meng, C., Cheng, R., Maniu, S., Senellart, P., Zhang, W.: Discovering meta-paths
    in large heterogeneous information networks. In: WWW (2015)
13. Muggleton, S.: Learning from Positive Data. In: ILP (1997)
14. Niu, F., Ré, C., Doan, A., Shavlik, J.: Tuffy: Scaling up Statistical Inference in
    Markov Logic Networks using an RDBMS. arXiv:1104.3216 (2011)
15. Ortona, S., Meduri, V.V., Papotti, P.: Robust Discovery of Positive and Negative
    Rules in Knowledge Bases. In: ICDE (2018)
16. Quinlan, J.R.: Learning Logical Definitions from Relations. Machine Learning 5(3)
    (Aug 1990)
17. Suchanek, F.M., Abiteboul, S., Senellart, P.: PARIS: Probabilistic Alignment of
    Relations, Instances, and Schema. PVLDB 5(3) (2011)
18. Suchanek, F.M., Lajus, J., Boschin, A., Weikum, G.: Knowledge Representation
    and Rule Mining in Entity-Centric KBs. In: Reasoning Web Summer School (2019)
19. Zeng, Q., Patel, J.M., Page, D.: QuickFOIL: Scalable Inductive Logic Program-
    ming. VLDB 8(3) (Nov 2014)
